
 Litter Trap Installed on Little Hunting Creek 
 Alexandria Gazette Packet 
 Arlington Connection 
 Burke Connection 
 Centre View 
 Chantilly Connection 
 Fairfax Connection 
 Fairfax Station/Clifton/Lorton Connection 
 Great Falls Connection 
 McLean Connection 
 Mount Vernon Gazette 
 Oak Hill/Herndon Connection 
 Potomac Almanac 
 Reston Connection 
 Springfield Connection 
 Vienna/Oakton Connection 
 Connection Sports 
 The Connection 
 Jump to content 
 Sign in 
 Wednesday, October 7, 2026
 Communities 
 Alexandria 
 Arlington 
 Burke 
 Centreville 
 Chantilly 
 Clifton 
 Fair Oaks 
 Fairfax 
 Fairfax Station 
 Great Falls 
 Herndon 
 Laurel Hill 
 Little Rocky Run 
 Lorton 
 McLean 
 Mount Vernon 
 Oak Hill 
 Oakton 
 Potomac 
 Reston 
 Springfield 
 Vienna 
 Home 
 News 
 News 
 Opinion 
 Politics 
 Education 
 Entertainment 
 HomeLifeStyle 
 Wellbeing 
 Newcomers 
 People 
 Elections 
 Virginia 
 House of Delegates 
 District 34 
 District 35 
 District 36 
 District 37 
 District 38 
 District 39 
 District 40 
 District 41 
 District 42 
 District 43 
 District 44 
 District 45 
 District 46 
 District 47 
 District 48 
 District 49 
 District 53 
 District 67 
 District 86 
 State Senate 
 District 30 
 District 31 
 District 32 
 District 33 
 District 34 
 District 35 
 District 36 
 District 37 
 District 38 
 District 39 
 Alexandria 
 Mayor 
 City Council 
 School Board 
 Ballot Questions 
 General Assembly 
 Arlington 
 County Board 
 School Board 
 Sheriff 
 More Races 
 Ballot Questions 
 General Assembly 
 Fairfax County 
 Board of Supervisors 
 School Board 
 Sheriff 
 More Races 
 Ballot Questions 
 General Assembly 
 Sports 
 Weather 
 Polls 
 Media 
 Photos 
 Galleries 
 Print Archives Online 
 Contact Us 
 Advertise with Us 
 Contact Us 
 Free Digital Subscription 
 Internship Applications 
 Send a Letter to the Editor 
 Submit a Calendar Item 
 Work with Us 
 Upvote 
 0 
 Votes 
 Litter Trap Installed on Little Hunting Creek
 Pilot program conducted on an area creek suffering from trash infestation.
 David Gahart has seen much trash float by in Little Hunting Creek.
 Photo by Mike Salmon .
 By Mike Salmon 
 Wednesday, May 13, 2020
 You name it, David Gahart has seen it float by in Little Hunting Creek in Mount Vernon. The creek runs along Gahart’s backyard, and throughout 
 Photo contributed
 The Bandalong Litter Trap helps stop the flow of litter in creeks, such as Little Hunting Creek in Mount Vernon.
 the 35 years he’s lived along the creek, the trash floating through has amazed him. “Lots of soccer balls,” he said. Along with the soccer balls are water bottles, oil drums, shopping carts, and just trash. “You name it, I’ve pulled it out,” Gahart said.
 He’s done with wading through the mud though, and glad to hear about Fairfax County’s latest experiment with the trash in Little Hunting Creek called the Bandalong Litter Trap.This is a floating device that collects floating trash and keeps it in screened traps and out of the water.
 According to Fairfax County, Little Hunting Creek has a reputation for being trashiest. It flows around Richmond Highway and is joined by side streams from Huntley Meadows Park. In 2016, a watershed cleanup event led by the Friends of Little Hunting Creek collected 423 bags of trash, 29 tires, and 10 shopping carts. Although the litter trap won’t do much good for shopping carts and discarded tires, surface trash such as water bottles and other floating debris should go right in the trap. Gahart is a member of the Friends of Little Hunting Creek group. “I’m glad they are doing it,” he said of the project.
 “The Bandalong is a proven, cost-effective solution for floatables control and is the answer to the growing problem of litter in our waterways,” according to Storm Water Systems, the company behind the Bandalong Litter Trap, located in Cleveland, Georgia. The Bandalong Litter Trap is the ideal in-stream solution for floatables where combined sewer overflows are concerned. The Bandalong Litter Trap has been cleaning waterways in Australia and Asia for more than 18 years. The traps are also used in Waycross, Georgia, and Little Rock, Arkansas.
 A few years ago, there was one installed in the Anacostia River in Prince George’s County, and it helped to remove 170,628 pounds of trash from the watershed, according to Storm Water Systems.
 Filling it up is not a problem, it’s emptying it so it won’t get clogged that can be a challenge, said the county. The recommended clean-out schedule they received from Storm Water Systems and from the operators of Bandalong installations on the Anacostia tributary and another in Mount Airy, MD are as follows: once a week inspection, clean out every other week, clean out after significant rain events and floods, clean out after holidays, and weekly clean out may be necessary during leaf drop in the fall, said Fairfax County spokesperson Matthew Kaiser. Fairfax County will see how that schedule works with their available manpower.
 Photo by Fairfax County
 Employees from the Fairfax County Department of Public Works and Environmental Services, BrightView, EQR, and StormWater Systems meet to discuss maintenance of the newly installed Bandalong floating litter trap, which will capture floating litter in Little Hunting Creek. Social distancing guidelines were observed.
 The pilot program will evaluate the effectiveness of the trap, the effort needed to maintain it, and the return on investment, the county said. The trap itself cost $104,500, and other project costs, such as design, permitting, site access, easements, and construction, totaled $587,000. Routine maintenance costs are estimated at $45,000 annually. The pilot project is funded by Stormwater Service District fees. Currently, no plans exist to install a second trap.
 “Stream litter is a problem throughout the county, so there are plenty of candidates,” for another litter trap if they want to extend the program, said Kaiser.
 According to Kaiser, the county puts much effort into the trash problem but it's more than just a stormwater management issue. Capturing floating litter in streams only addresses a symptom, not the cause. Addressing the sources of litter requires a coordinated effort from all watershed stakeholders, including local and state governments, elected officials, business owners, nonprofit organizations, community groups, schools, and residents. Education, outreach, and broad support for environmental stewardship can help prevent trash from becoming litter in the first place.
 “There are a lot of people/orgs involved in trying to prevent and reduce litter. County ecologists work with Fairfax County students. Solid Waste code compliance officers work with business and multi-family property owners to right-size their trash/recycling bins. Park Authority has watershed cleanup events. VDOT has the adopt-a-highway program. The list goes on and on,” said Kaiser.
 While the Bandalong won’t catch shopping carts that can be particularly damaging in a stream, new legislation passed by this year’s General Assembly might. Sen. Scott Surovell backed a bill that allows Fairfax and Arlington counties to pass local regulations to fine retailers for as much as $300 per wayward cart.
 Little Hunting Creek is the site of many past clean up attempts by various citizen groups, Supervisor Dan Storck’s office, and even the scouts, but somehow it still gets full of water bottles and household trash from upstream.
 More like this story
 Opinion: Commentary: Taking Out the Trash 
 Picking Up 474 Bags of Trash 
 Trashing Mother Earth 
 Pulling Shopping Carts, Trash Out of Little Hunting Creek 
 Column: State: Local Streams and Rivers Are Polluted 
 Latest news 
 Cool Cars Draw Huge Crowd on Labor Day 
 ADVANCING MENTAL HEALTH AWARENESS Breakfast 
 APD Celebrates Staff Promotions 
 Boom in the Middle of the Night 
 Keith Solo Show Features Landscapes 
 Coyotes Are Secretive, but They Are Around 
 Follow Us @FollowFairfax 
 Sections 
 News / 
 Sports / 
 Opinion / 
 Politics / 
 Education / 
 Entertainment / 
 HomeLifeStyle / 
 Wellbeing / 
 Newcomers / 
 People 
 About Us 
 Staff / 
 Advertising / 
 Contact Us / 
 Terms of Use / 
 Privacy Policy / 
 Print Archives Online 
 Online Submissions 
 Free Digital Subscription / 
 Internship Applications /
 Mother's Day Photo Submission 
 Contents of this site are © Copyright 2026 Ellington. All rights reserved.
