 
 Fenty Unveils First in Western Hemisphere Trash Removal System for Anacostia River | doee 
 Sorry, you need to enable JavaScript to visit this website.
 Skip to main content
 doee
 DOEE
 DOEE Home 
 Environmental Services 
 Air Quality 
 Environmental Education and Outreach 
 Lead in the District 
 Fisheries and Wildlife 
 Toxic Substances 
 Water in the District 
 Sustainability 
 Vegetation: Trees, Flowers & Plants 
 Energy in the District 
 Clean Energy DC 
 Utility Affordability Programs 
 Building Energy Performance & Benchmarking 
 DC Sustainable Energy Utility 
 Solar Initiatives 
 Property Assessed Clean Energy 
 Buy Green Power 
 Energy Grid Modernization 
 Resources 
 Applications, Licenses, Permits 
 Environmental Data & Maps 
 For Businesses 
 For Residents 
 Grants and Funding 
 Plans & Commitments 
 Publications 
 IRA Rebates & Tax Incentives 
 Laws & Regulations 
 Air Quality Regulations 
 Energy 
 Fines & Enforcement 
 Fish & Wildlife 
 Public Notices & Hearings 
 Toxic Substances 
 Water Quality 
 About DOEE 
 Agency Offices and Divisions 
 Open Government and FOIA - DOEE 
 Leading by Example 
 For the Press 
 News Room 
 DOEE Director 
 Senior Leadership Team 
 Employment Opportunities 
 Listen 
 Fenty Unveils First in Western Hemisphere Trash Removal System for Anacostia River
 Tuesday, May 12, 2009 
 Media Contact: Alan Heymann (202) 741-2136 
 Washington, DC – Mayor Adrian M. Fenty today unveiled an innovative device, called the Bandalong Litter Trap, that the District is testing to remove trash from the Anacostia River. The trap, tested and used successfully for more than 10 years in Australia and Asia, is the first of its kind installed by a municipality in the Western Hemisphere.
 “The Anacostia River is a national treasure,” said Mayor Fenty. “We hope the installation of this litter trap will help the District continue down the path of letting all residents and visitors swim, boat and fish in the Anacostia by 2032. It will also help us meet our regulatory responsibilities.”
 The new Bandalong Litter Trap is a major step in fulfilling the Mayor’s Green DC Agenda (green.dc.gov/agenda) commitment to the restoration of Anacostia. The first step was developing a plan; the ‘Anacostia River Trash Reduction Plan’ is available in its entirety on the DDOE website . It includes a systematic assessment of the types of trash in the river.
 The Bandalong Litter Trap is a passive device, working 365 days a year using only the water’s natural current to collect litter. A patented gate contains litter inside the trap when flow is reversed in tidal areas. The Bandalong is safe for fish, waterfowl, and other aquatic wildlife. At Watts Branch, the Earth Conservation Corps will maintain the trap and remove trash from it.
 “We’ve already developed a report on what kind of trash ends up in the Anacostia,” said DDOE Director George S. Hawkins. “As we work with our residents and the neighboring jurisdictions to keep the trash out of the river in the first place, the next step is to remove what makes its way downstream.”
 Storm Water Systems of Cleveland, Georgia installed the Bandalong trap on Watts Branch, the Anacostia’s largest tributary in the District, at a cost of approximately $55,000. The District Department of the Environment (DDOE), Earth Conservation Corps and Anacostia Riverkeeper are testing the device as part of a two-year study of various trash-reduction technologies.
 “What we see at work today is a community with a shared vision and commitment to a clean Anacostia River.  Storm Water Systems is proud to be part of this effort,” said Gary Hopkins, President of Storm Water Systems.
 The Bandalong is installed in many locations in Australia, including Sydney, Melbourne, Victoria and Fremantle, as well as New Zealand, Malaysia, Singapore, and Indonesia.  
 Photos of the Mayor's Bandalong Announcement 
 Amharic (አማርኛ) 
 Chinese (中文) 
 French (Français) 
 Korean (한국어) 
 Spanish (Español) 
 Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt) 
 Office Hours 
Monday - Friday 9 am to 5 pm
 Connect With Us 
1200 First Street, NE
Washington, DC 20002
 Phone: (202) 535-2600 
Fax: (202) 535-2881
TTY: (800) 855-1000
Email: [email protected] 
 Ask the Director 
 Agency Performance 
 Accessibility 
 Privacy & Security 
 About DC.GOV 
 Terms & Conditions 
 © 2023 District of Columbia
