URL: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-2025-title22-vol1/pdf/CFR-2025-title22-vol1-sec62-22.pdf
Fecha de consulta: 2026-10-05
HTTP: 200 application/pdf

270 
22 CFR Ch. I (4–1–25 Edition) 
§ 62.22 
projects, and promote professional re-
lationships and communications. 
(c) Designation. The Department of 
State may, in its sole discretion, des-
ignate bona fide programs which offer 
foreign nationals the opportunity to 
engage in short-term visits for the pur-
pose 
of 
lecturing, 
observing, 
con-
sulting, training, or demonstrating 
special skills at research institutions, 
museums, libraries, post-secondary ac-
credited educational institutions, or 
similar types of institutions. 
(d) Visitor eligibility. A person partici-
pating in the Exchange Visitor Pro-
gram under this section shall satisfy 
the definition of a short-term scholar 
as set forth in § 62.4. 
(e) Cross-cultural activities and orienta-
tion. Due to the nature of such ex-
changes, sponsors of programs for 
short-term scholars shall be exempted 
from the requirements of providing 
cross-cultural activities and orienta-
tion as set forth in §§ 62.8(d) and 
62.10(c). However, sponsors are encour-
aged to provide such programs for 
short-term scholars whenever appro-
priate. 
(f) Location of exchange. The short- 
term scholar shall participate in the 
Exchange Visitor Program at the con-
ferences, workshops, seminars, or other 
events or activities stated on his or her 
Form DS–2019. A participant may also 
lecture or consult at institutions not 
listed on the Form DS–2019 if his or her 
Responsible Officer issues a written au-
thorization of such activity. Such writ-
ten authorization must be attached to 
the participant’s Form DS–2019. 
(g) Duration of participation. The 
short-term scholar shall be authorized 
to participate in the Exchange Visitor 
Program for the length of time nec-
essary to complete the program, which 
time shall not exceed six months. Pro-
grams under this section are exempted 
from § 62.8(b) governing the minimum 
duration of a program. Extensions be-
yond the duration of participation are 
not permitted under this category. 
[58 FR 15196, Mar. 19, 1993; 58 FR 48448, Sept. 
16, 1993, as amended at 61 FR 39585, July 30, 
1996; 64 FR 17975, Apr. 13, 1999. Redesignated 
at 64 FR 54539, Oct. 7, 1999] 
§ 62.22
Trainees and interns. 
(a) Introduction. These regulations 
govern 
Exchange 
Visitor 
Programs 
under which foreign nationals with sig-
nificant experience in their occupa-
tional field have the opportunity to re-
ceive training in the United States in 
such field. These regulations also es-
tablish a new internship program under 
which foreign national students and re-
cent graduates of foreign post-sec-
ondary academic institutions have the 
opportunity to receive training in the 
United States in their field of academic 
study. These regulations include spe-
cific requirements to ensure that both 
trainees and interns receive hands-on 
experience in their specific fields of 
study/expertise and that they do not 
merely participate in work programs. 
Regulations dealing with training op-
portunities for certain foreign students 
who are studying at post-secondary ac-
credited educational institutions in the 
United States are located at § 62.23 
(‘‘College and University Students’’). 
Regulations governing alien physicians 
in graduate medical education or train-
ing are located at § 62.27 (‘‘Alien Physi-
cians’’). 
(b) Purpose. (1)(i) The primary objec-
tives of the programs offered under 
these regulations are to enhance the 
skills and expertise of exchange visi-
tors in their academic or occupational 
fields through participation in struc-
tured and guided work-based training 
and internship programs and to im-
prove participants’ knowledge of Amer-
ican techniques, methodologies, and 
technology. Such training and intern-
ship programs are also intended to in-
crease participants’ understanding of 
American culture and society and to 
enhance Americans’ knowledge of for-
eign cultures and skills through an 
open interchange of ideas between par-
ticipants and their American associ-
ates. A key goal of the Fulbright-Hays 
Act, which authorizes these programs, 
is that participants will return to their 
home countries and share their experi-
ences with their countrymen. 
(ii) Exchange Visitor Program train-
ing and internship programs must not 
be used as substitutes for ordinary em-
ployment or work purposes; nor may 
they be used under any circumstances 

271 
Department of State 
§ 62.22 
to displace American workers. The re-
quirements in these regulations for 
trainees are designed to distinguish be-
tween bona fide training, which is per-
mitted, and merely gaining additional 
work experience, which is not per-
mitted. The requirements in these reg-
ulations for interns are designed to dis-
tinguish between a period of work- 
based learning in the intern’s academic 
field, which is permitted (and which re-
quires a substantial academic frame-
work in the participant’s field), and un-
skilled labor, which is not. 
(2) In addition, a specific objective of 
the new internship program is to pro-
vide foreign nationals who are cur-
rently enrolled full-time and pursuing 
studies at a degree- or certificate- 
granting post-secondary academic in-
stitution or graduated from such an in-
stitution no more than 12 months prior 
to their exchange visitor program 
begin date a period of work-based 
learning to allow them to develop prac-
tical skills that will enhance their fu-
ture careers. Bridging the gap between 
formal education and practical work 
experience and gaining substantive 
cross-cultural experience are major 
goals 
in 
educational 
institutions 
around the world. By providing train-
ing opportunities for current foreign 
students and recent foreign graduates 
at formative stages of their develop-
ment, the U.S. Government will build 
partnerships, promote mutual under-
standing, and develop networks for re-
lationships that will last through gen-
erations as these foreign nationals 
move into leadership roles in a broad 
range of occupational fields in their 
own societies. These results are closely 
tied to the goals, themes, and spirit of 
the Fulbright-Hays Act. 
(c) Designation. (1) The Department 
may, in its sole discretion, designate as 
sponsors those entities it deems to 
meet the eligibility requirements set 
forth in Subpart A of 22 CFR part 62 
and to have the organizational capac-
ity successfully to administer and fa-
cilitate training and internship pro-
grams. 
(2) Sponsors must provide training 
and internship programs only in the 
occupational category or categories for 
which the Department has designated 
them as sponsors. The Department 
may designate training and internship 
programs in any of the following occu-
pational categories: 
(i) Agriculture, Forestry, and Fish-
ing; 
(ii) Arts and Culture; 
(iii) 
Construction 
and 
Building 
Trades; 
(iv) Education, Social Sciences, Li-
brary Science, Counseling and Social 
Services; 
(v) Health Related Occupations; 
(vi) Hospitality and Tourism; 
(vii) Information Media and Commu-
nications; 
(viii) Management, Business, Com-
merce and Finance; 
(ix) Public Administration and Law; 
and 
(x) The Sciences, Engineering, Archi-
tecture, Mathematics, and Industrial 
Occupations. 
(d) Selection criteria. (1) In addition to 
satisfying the general requirements set 
forth in § 62.10(a), sponsors must ensure 
that 
trainees 
and 
interns 
have 
verifiable English language skills suffi-
cient to function on a day-to-day basis 
in their training environment. Spon-
sors must verify an applicant’s English 
language proficiency through a recog-
nized English language test, by signed 
documentation from an academic insti-
tution or English language school, or 
through a documented interview con-
ducted by the sponsor either in-person 
or by videoconferencing, or by tele-
phone if videoconferencing is not a via-
ble option. 
(2) Sponsors of training programs 
must verify that all potential trainees 
are foreign nationals who have either a 
degree or professional certificate from 
a foreign post-secondary academic in-
stitution and at least one year of prior 
related work experience in their occu-
pational field acquired outside the 
United States or five years of work ex-
perience in their occupational field ac-
quired outside the United States. 
(3) Sponsors of internship programs 
must verify that all potential interns 
are foreign nationals who are currently 
enrolled full-time and pursuing studies 
in their advanced chosen career field at 
a degree- or certificate-granting post- 
secondary academic institution outside 
the United States or graduated from 
such an institution no more than 12 

272 
22 CFR Ch. I (4–1–25 Edition) 
§ 62.22 
months prior to their exchange visitor 
program begin date. 
(e) Issuance of Forms DS–2019. In addi-
tion to the requirements set forth in 
Subpart A, sponsors must ensure that: 
(1) They do not issue Forms DS–2019 
to potential participants in training 
and internship programs until they se-
cure placements for trainees or interns 
and complete and secure requisite sig-
natures on Form DS–7002, Training/In-
ternship Placement Plan (T/IPP); 
(2) Trainees and interns have suffi-
cient finances to support themselves 
for their entire stay in the United 
States, including housing and living 
expenses; and 
(3) The training and internship pro-
grams expose participants to American 
techniques, methodologies, and tech-
nology and expand upon the partici-
pants’ existing knowledge and skills. 
Programs must not duplicate the par-
ticipants’ prior work experience or 
training received elsewhere. 
(f) Obligations of training and intern-
ship program sponsors. (1) Sponsors des-
ignated by the Department to admin-
ister training and internship programs 
must: 
(i) Ensure that trainees and interns 
are appropriately selected, placed, ori-
ented, supervised, and evaluated; 
(ii) Be available to trainees and in-
terns (and host organizations, as appro-
priate) to assist as facilitators, coun-
selors, and information resources; 
(iii) Ensure that training and intern-
ship programs provide a balance be-
tween the trainees’ and interns’ learn-
ing opportunities and their contribu-
tions to the organizations in which 
they are placed; 
(iv) Ensure that the training and in-
ternship programs are full-time (min-
imum of 32 hours a week); and 
(v) Ensure that any host organiza-
tions and third parties involved in the 
recruitment, 
selection, 
screening, 
placement, orientation, evaluation for, 
or the provision of training and intern-
ship programs are sufficiently educated 
on the goals, objectives, and regula-
tions of the Exchange Visitor Program 
and adhere to all regulations set forth 
in this part as well as all additional 
terms and conditions governing Ex-
change Visitor Program administra-
tion that the Department may from 
time to time impose. 
(2) Sponsors must certify that they 
or any host organization acting on the 
sponsor’s behalf: 
(i) Have sufficient resources, plant, 
equipment, 
and 
trained 
personnel 
available to provide the specified train-
ing and internship program; 
(ii) Provide continuous on-site super-
vision and mentoring of trainees and 
interns by experienced and knowledge-
able staff; 
(iii) Ensure that trainees and interns 
obtain skills, knowledge, and com-
petencies through structured and guid-
ed activities such as classroom train-
ing, seminars, rotation through several 
departments, on-the-job training, at-
tendance at conferences, and similar 
learning activities, as appropriate in 
specific circumstances; 
(iv) Conduct periodic evaluations of 
trainees and interns, as set forth in 
§ 62.22(l); 
(v) Do not displace full- or part-time 
or temporary or permanent American 
workers or serve to fill a labor need 
and ensure that the positions that 
trainees and interns fill exist primarily 
to assist trainees and interns in achiev-
ing the objectives of their participa-
tion in training and internship pro-
grams; and 
(vi) Certify that training and intern-
ship programs in the field of agri-
culture meet all the requirements of 
the Fair Labor Standards Act, as 
amended (29 U.S.C. 201 et seq.) and the 
Migrant 
and 
Seasonal 
Agricultural 
Worker Protection Act, as amended (29 
U.S.C. 1801 et seq.). 
(3) Sponsors or any third parties act-
ing on their behalf must complete thor-
ough screening of potential trainees or 
interns, including a documented inter-
view conducted by the sponsor either 
in-person or by videoconferencing, or 
by telephone if videoconferencing is 
not a viable option. 
(4) Sponsors must retain all docu-
ments referred to in § 62.22(f) for at 
least three years following the comple-
tion of all training and internship pro-
grams. Documents and any requisite 
signatures may be retained in either 
hard copy or electronic format. 

273 
Department of State 
§ 62.22 
(g) Use of third parties—(1) Sponsors 
use of third parties. Sponsors may en-
gage third parties (including, but not 
limited to host organizations, partners, 
local businesses, governmental enti-
ties, academic institutions, and other 
foreign or domestic agents) to assist 
them in the conduct of their designated 
training and internship programs. Such 
third parties must have an executed 
written agreement with the sponsor to 
act on behalf of the sponsor in the con-
duct of the sponsor’s program. This 
agreement must outline the obliga-
tions and full relationship between the 
sponsor and third party on all matters 
involving the administration of their 
exchange visitor program. A sponsor’s 
use of a third party does not relieve the 
sponsor of its obligations to comply 
with and to ensure third party compli-
ance with Exchange Visitor Program 
regulations. Any failure by any third 
party to comply with the regulations 
set forth in this part or with any addi-
tional terms and conditions governing 
Exchange Visitor Program administra-
tion that the Department may from 
time to time impose will be imputed to 
the sponsors engaging such third party. 
(2) Screening and vetting third parties 
operating 
outside 
the 
United 
States. 
Sponsors must ascertain that third 
parties operating outside the United 
States are legitimate entities within 
the context of their home country en-
vironment. For third parties that oper-
ate as businesses, sponsors must obtain 
relevant home country documentation, 
such as a business registration or cer-
tification. Such home country docu-
mentation must include an English 
Language translation for any business 
registration or certification documents 
submitted in a foreign language. Writ-
ten agreements between sponsors and 
third parties operating outside the 
United States must include annually 
updated price lists for training and in-
ternship programs offered by each 
third party, and must indicate that 
such overseas third parties are suffi-
ciently trained in all aspects of the 
programs they represent, including the 
regulations set forth in this part. 
(3) Screening and vetting host organiza-
tions. Sponsors must adequately screen 
all potential host organizations at 
which a trainee or intern will be placed 
by obtaining the following informa-
tion: 
(i) Employer Identification Number 
(EIN) used for tax purposes; 
(ii) Third party verification of tele-
phone number, address, and profes-
sional activities, e.g., via advertising, 
brochures, Web site, and/or feedback 
from prior participants; and 
(iii) Verification of Worker’s Com-
pensation Insurance Policy or equiva-
lent in each state or, if applicable, evi-
dence of state exemption from require-
ment of coverage. 
(4) Site visits of host organizations. 
Sponsors must conduct site visits of 
host organizations that have not pre-
viously participated successfully in the 
sponsor’s training and internship pro-
grams and that have fewer than 25 em-
ployees or less than three million dol-
lars in annual revenue. Placements at 
academic institutions or at federal, 
state, or local government offices are 
specifically excluded from this require-
ment. The purpose of the site visits is 
for the sponsors to ensure that host or-
ganizations possess and maintain the 
ability and resources to provide struc-
tured and guided work-based learning 
experiences according to individualized 
T/IPPs and that host organizations un-
derstand and meet their obligations set 
forth in this part. 
(h) 
Host 
organization 
obligations. 
Sponsors must ensure that: 
(1) Host organizations sign a com-
pleted Form DS–7002 to verify that all 
placements are appropriate and con-
sistent with the objectives of the train-
ees or interns as outlined in their pro-
gram applications and as set forth in 
their T/IPPs. All parties involved in in-
ternship programs should recognize 
that interns are seeking entry-level 
training and experience. Accordingly, 
all placements must be tailored to the 
skills and experience level of the indi-
vidual intern; 
(2) Host organizations notify spon-
sors promptly of any concerns about, 
changes in, or deviations from T/IPPs 
during training and internship pro-
grams and contact sponsors imme-
diately in the event of any emergency 
involving trainees or interns; 
(3) Host organizations abide by all 
federal, state, and local occupational 
health and safety laws; and 

274 
22 CFR Ch. I (4–1–25 Edition) 
§ 62.22 
(4) Host organizations abide by all 
program rules and regulations set forth 
by the sponsors, including the comple-
tion of all mandatory program evalua-
tions. 
(i) Training/internship placement plan 
(Form DS–7002). (1) Sponsors must fully 
complete and obtain all requisite sig-
natures on a Form DS–7002 for each 
trainee or intern before issuing a Form 
DS–2019. Sponsors must provide each 
signatory an executed copy of the 
Form DS–7002. Upon request, trainees 
and interns must present their fully ex-
ecuted Form DS–7002 to Consular Offi-
cials during their visa interview. 
(2) To further distinguish between 
bona fide training for trainees or work- 
based learning for interns, which are 
permitted, and unskilled or casual 
labor positions which are not, all T/ 
IPPs must: 
(i) State the specific goals and objec-
tives of the training and internship 
program (for each phase or component, 
if applicable); 
(ii) Detail the knowledge, skills, or 
techniques to be imparted to the train-
ee or intern (for each phase or compo-
nent, if applicable); and 
(iii) Describe the methods of perform-
ance evaluation and the supervision for 
each phase or component, if applicable. 
(3) A T/IPP for trainees must be di-
vided into specific and various phases 
or components, and for each phase or 
component must: 
(i) 
Describe 
the 
methodology 
of 
training and 
(ii) Provide a chronology or syllabus. 
(4) A T/IPP for interns must: 
(i) Describe the role of the intern in 
the organization and, if applicable, 
identify various departments or func-
tional areas in which the intern will 
work; and 
(ii) Identify the specific tasks and ac-
tivities the intern will complete. 
(j) Program exclusions. Sponsors des-
ignated by the Department to admin-
ister training and internship programs 
must not: 
(1) Place trainees or interns in un-
skilled or casual labor positions, in po-
sitions that require or involve child 
care or elder care; or in clinical or any 
other kind of work that involves pa-
tient care or patient contact, including 
any work that would require trainees 
or interns to provide therapy, medica-
tion, or other clinical or medical care 
(e.g., sports or physical therapy, psy-
chological counseling, nursing, den-
tistry, 
veterinary 
medicine, 
social 
work, speech therapy, early childhood 
education); 
(2) Place trainees or interns in posi-
tions, occupations, or businesses that 
could bring the Exchange Visitor Pro-
gram or the Department into notoriety 
or disrepute; or 
(3) Engage or otherwise cooperate or 
contract with a Staffing/Employment 
Agency 
to 
recruit, 
screen, 
orient, 
place, evaluate, or train trainees or in-
terns, or in any other way involve such 
agencies in an Exchange Visitor Pro-
gram training and internship program. 
(4) Issue a T/IPP for any trainee or 
intern for which the duties involve 
more than 20 per cent clerical work. 
(5) Have less than three departmental 
or functional rotations for ‘‘Hospi-
tality and Tourism’’ training and in-
ternship programs of six months or 
longer. 
(k) Duration. The duration of partici-
pation in a training and internship pro-
gram must be established before a 
sponsor issues a Form DS–2019 and 
must not exceed the sponsor’s author-
ized designation as set forth in the 
sponsor’s letter of designation or most 
recent letter of redesignation. Except 
as noted below, the maximum duration 
of a training program is 18 months, and 
the maximum duration of an intern-
ship program is 12 months. For train-
ing programs in the field of agriculture 
and in the occupational category of 
Hospitality and Tourism, the max-
imum duration of program participa-
tion is 12 months. If an original T/IPP 
specifies that at least six months of a 
program includes related classroom 
participation and studies, training pro-
grams in the field of agriculture may 
be designated for a total duration of 18 
months. Program extensions are per-
mitted within the maximum duration 
as set forth in the letter of designation/ 
redesignation provided that the need 
for an extended training or internship 
program is documented by the full 
completion and execution of a new 
Form DS–7002. 12-month training pro-
grams in the field of agriculture may 
not be extended to 18 months by adding 

275 
Department of State 
§ 62.23 
six months of classroom participation 
and studies at the end of the original 
12-month program duration. Per above, 
the six months of related classroom 
participation and studies must have 
been part of the trainee’s original T/ 
IPP. 
(l) Evaluations. In order to ensure the 
quality of training and internship pro-
grams, sponsors must develop proce-
dures for evaluating all trainees and 
interns. All required evaluations must 
be completed prior to the conclusion of 
a training and internship program, and 
both the trainees and interns and their 
immediate supervisors must sign the 
evaluation forms. For programs ex-
ceeding six months’ duration, at a min-
imum, midpoint and concluding eval-
uations are required. For programs of 
six months or less, at a minimum, con-
cluding evaluations are required. Spon-
sors must retain trainee and intern 
evaluations (electronic or hard copy) 
for a period of at least three years fol-
lowing the completion of each training 
and internship program. 
(m) Issuance of certificate of eligibility 
for exchange visitor (J–1) status. Spon-
sors must not deliver or cause to be de-
livered any Certificate of Eligibility 
for 
Exchange 
Visitor 
(J–1) 
Status 
(Form DS–2019) to potential trainees or 
interns unless the individualized Form 
DS–7002 required by § 62.22(i) has been 
completed and signed by all requisite 
parties. 
(n) Additional training and internship 
program participation. Foreign nationals 
who enter the United States under the 
Exchange Visitor Program to partici-
pate in training and internship pro-
grams are eligible to participate in ad-
ditional training and internship pro-
grams under certain conditions. For 
both trainees and interns, additional 
training and internship programs must 
address the development of more ad-
vanced skills or a different field of ex-
pertise. Interns may apply for addi-
tional internship programs if they: 
(1) Are currently enrolled full-time 
and pursuing studies at degree- or cer-
tificate-granting post-secondary aca-
demic institutions outside the United 
States; or, 
(2) Have graduated from such institu-
tions no more than 12 months prior to 
the start of their proposed exchange 
visitor program. A new internship is 
also permissible when a student has 
successfully completed a recognized 
course of study (i.e., associate, bach-
elors, masters, Ph.D., or their recog-
nized equivalents) and has enrolled and 
is pursuing studies at the next higher 
level of academic study. Trainees are 
eligible for additional training pro-
grams after a period of at least two 
years residency outside the United 
States following completion of their 
training program. Participants who 
have successfully completed internship 
programs and no longer meet the selec-
tion criteria for an internship program 
may participate in a training program 
if they have resided outside the United 
States or its territories for at least two 
years. If participants meet these selec-
tion criteria and fulfill these condi-
tions, there will be no limit to the 
number of times they may participate 
in a training and internship program. 
[75 FR 48559, Aug. 11, 2010] 
§ 62.23
College 
and 
university 
stu-
dents. 
(a) Purpose. A program under this 
section provides foreign students the 
opportunity to participate in a des-
ignated 
exchange 
visitor 
program 
while studying at a degree-granting 
post-secondary accredited academic in-
stitution or participating in a student 
internship program which fulfills the 
student’s academic study. A student 
sponsored in this category may partici-
pate in a degree, non-degree, or student 
internship program. Such an exchange 
is intended to promote mutual under-
standing by fostering the exchange of 
ideas between foreign students and 
their American counterparts. 
(b) Designation. The Department of 
State may, in its sole discretion, des-
ignate bona fide programs which offer 
foreign students the opportunity to 
study in the United States at a post- 
secondary accredited academic institu-
tion or to participate in a student in-
ternship program. 
(c) Selection criteria. A sponsor selects 
the college and university students 
who participate in its exchange visitor 
program. A sponsor must secure suffi-
cient background information on the 
students to ensure that they have the 
academic credentials required for its 
