URL: https://www.africa.engineering.cmu.edu/about/index.html
Fecha de consulta: 2026-10-05
HTTP: 200 text/html; charset=UTF-8



About Carnegie Mellon University Africa - Carnegie Mellon University Africa

Skip to Content

Carnegie Mellon University Africa

EN
 | 
FR

Menu

Admissions

Academics

Research

Impact

Student life

Recruit our graduates

About

Events

News

Directory

Search

Search

Home

About Carnegie Mellon University Africa

            Leadership

            Careers at CMU-Africa

            Make a gift

            Living in Rwanda

            Safety, security, and health

            Contact us

Carnegie Mellon University Africa is the only U.S. research university offering its master’s degrees with a full-time faculty, staff, and operations in Africa. The location offers three master’s degrees through Carnegie Mellon’s top-ranked College of Engineering: Electrical and Computer Engineering, Information Technology, and Engineering Artificial Intelligence.

CMU-Africa by the numbers

360+

Students

25

Nationalities represented in our student body

1,000+

Alumni

85%

Graduates working on the continent

History

In 2011, Carnegie Mellon University and the Government of Rwanda signed an agreement to establish a College of Engineering location in Kigali, Rwanda. This partnership was designed to respond to the critical shortage of high-quality engineering talent required to harness Africa's tremendous potential as home to the fastest-growing workforce in the world. Carnegie Mellon University's presence in Rwanda continues to provide a platform to engage in Africa's most significant opportunities and challenges through world-class education and contextually relevant research.

Vision

CMU-Africa will have a transformative impact on African society through continual innovation in education, research, creativity, and entrepreneurship.

Mission

CMU-Africa delivers transformative educational programs to cultivate future technology leaders, entrepreneurs, and innovators across Africa. We engage in collaborative research and innovation to address African and global challenges.

Explore our graduate degree programs

Master of Science in Electrical and Computer Engineering

Master of Science in Information Technology

Master of Science in Engineering Artificial Intelligence

Source: 
Carnegie Mellon University

Carnegie Mellon University is a private research university based in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

About the College of Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University

The world-class 
College of Engineering
 is recognized for excellence, innovation, and the societal relevance of its pursuits. We produce creative and technically strong engineers, and smart solutions to global challenges. We do this with an unprecedented drive to integrate engineering, sciences, arts, business and other disciplines to produce transformative results.

With cutting-edge information security, innovative start-ups, big data, hands-on learning, and creative mobile applications, Carnegie Mellon University doesn't imagine the future–it creates it.

Learn more about the history of Carnegie Mellon
 and 
read about how Carnegie Mellon engineers have changed the world. 

The African Engineering and Technology Network

The Afretec Network

A pan-African collaboration of technology-focused universities from across the continent, led by Carnegie Mellon University Africa.

Learn more

			    			        Are you the right fit for CMU-Africa?

			    			        Learn more about the Mastercard Foundation Scholars Program

			    			        Explore news from CMU-Africa

Carnegie Mellon University Africa
 Regional ICT Center of Excellence Bldg
 Kigali Innovation City - Bumbogo
 BP 6150, Kigali, Rwanda

africa-info@andrew.cmu.edu

LinkedIn: 
Carnegie Mellon University Africa
Facebook:

@CMU.Africa
Instagram:

@cmuafrica
YouTube:

CMU-Africa
Photo Library: 
CMU-Africa

Contact us

Careers

Make a gift

Faculty and staff resources

2026 Carnegie Mellon University / 
Legal

“Imagination is more important than knowledge. Knowledge is limited. Imagination encircles the world.” 
Albert Einstein

2026 Carnegie Mellon University / 
Legal

