URL: https://www.e-resident.gov.ee/
Fecha de consulta: 2026-10-05
HTTP: 200 text/html; charset=utf-8

e-Residency of Estonia | Apply and start an EU company online
Skip to content
Why e-Residency?
How it works
Resources
Service Providers
Blog
Events
Why e-Residency?
How it works
Resources
Service Providers
Blog
Events
your digital id your company your freedom
Start, run and grow an EU company easily and securely with your e-⁠Residency digital ID
How it works
Backed by the Government of Estonia
Do business easily
Incorporate in Estonia with e-⁠Residency. 100% digital, always in English, entirely built for your needs.
See how easy it is
Feel digitally secure
Have complete confidence doing business safely in the world's most digital country, Estonia.
See why we are trusted
Unrivalled growth opportunities
Position yourself to thrive: trade within the EU, reach investors and partners, and join a business-friendly ecosystem.
Explore opportunities
Join an active community
Connect to the world's entrepreneurs. Find a network of experience, advice and support from like-minded people.
Learn how to participate
What is e-Residency?
E-Residency of Estonia is a government-issued digital identity which gives global entrepreneurs remote access to the world's most digital country. It provides the possibility to securely authenticate yourself online and sign documents using the most secure and efficient electronic signatures. Plus, the ability to start a company 100% online from anywhere.

Estonia was the first country to offer e-Residency, starting in 2014. It remains the most popular programme of its kind for ambitious entrepreneurial people
.

Read more about the programme
How it works
Become an e-⁠resident
3-8 weeks
Apply online and wait for approval. Then pick up your e-Residency kit, including your personal digital ID card.
Start a company
1-2 days
Use your e-Residency ID card to register your company 100% online. Access business banking and payment solutions.
Run your company
as long as it takes
Sign documents digitally, file reports online, outsource admin and network among 40,000+ business owners within the e-Residency community.
144647
e-⁠residents from 170+ countries
44082
companies founded by e-⁠residents
102
Marketplace service providers
With e-Residency, you can easily register an EU business online without relocating and free from bureaucracy: great for remote entrepreneurs!
Christelle Sidoine
Easy Assistant&Co OÜ, South Africa
E-Residency is the best option to set up a company for multiple founders without bureaucracy: our business was up and running cheaply within days.
Georg Klausner
Mansiontech OÜ, Austria
It’s easier and safer than ever before to start an EU company and access these opportunities, thanks to e-Residency. In an uncertain world, e-Residency is a no-brainer for entrepreneurs like me.
Dominik Panosch
sign.online, Austria
The application process went smoothly and quickly. I experienced no complications and picked up my e-Residency kit in less than the quoted time.
Dr. Priya E. Abraham
Cyberconnecting OÜ, Austria/UK
I looked at different options and chose Estonia: with e-Residency, we don’t have to print out and keep tons of documents. Everything is digital.
Konstantin Klyagin
Redwerk OÜ, Ukraine
Subscribe to the e-⁠Residency newsletter
Get the best e-Residency content delivered straight to your inbox, from the latest news and events to inspiring e-resident stories and helpful how-to-guides.
E-mail address
Country
Subscribe
You can unsubscribe anytime. For more details, review our 
Privacy Policy
About
About us
Partnerships
Press & media
Key statistics
Resources
ID card renewal
UK Hub
For startups
Support
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Have any questions?

Contact our support