URL: https://www.jurist.org/news/2026/10/second-federal-judge-blocks-president-trumps-100k-h-1b-visa-fee-and-orders-dhs-to-complete-proper-rulemaking/
Fecha de consulta: 2026-10-05
HTTP: 200 text/html; charset=UTF-8

Second federal judge blocks Trump's $100K H-1B visa fee - JURIST - News

DONATE NOW

News 
▾

All Legal News

US Legal News

World Legal News

This Day @ Law

Dispatches 
▾

All Dispatches

Afghanistan

Canada

EU

Ghana

India

Iran

Israel

Italy

Kazakhstan

Kenya

Myanmar

Pakistan

Peru

Romania

Sri Lanka

Taiwan

UK

Ukraine

US

Commentary 
▾

All Commentary

Faculty Commentary

Professional Commentary

Student Commentary

Features 
▾

All Features

Explainers

Long Reads

Multimedia

Interviews

Topics

Rule of Law 
▾

Materials

Podcasts

About 
▾

FAQ

Staff

Awards

Apply

Journalist in Residence

Board of Directors

Contact Us

Donate 
▾

Why Support JURIST?

Donate

Honor Roll

Search: 

Search

News
Carol M. Highsmith
, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons

Second federal judge blocks Trump’s $100K H-1B visa fee

Luke Ravetto | U. Pittsburgh School of Law, US

October 1, 2026 08:01:33 pm

The US District Court for the Northern District of California on Wednesday 
blocked
 President Donald Trump’s $100,000 fee on new H-1B visas for highly skilled foreign workers, marking the second time a federal court has enjoined enforcement of the policy.
Applauding
 the court’s decision, Steve Bressler, senior legal adviser at the group Democracy Forward, stated:
The administration tried to financially punish companies with an arbitrary, unauthorized, and deeply harmful $100,000 fee imposed without Congress. This decision adds to those protecting workers and communities, and protects a system that was thrown into chaos overnight. It also reaffirms a fundamental principle of our democracy: no administration is above the law, and the president cannot rewrite immigration policy with the stroke of a pen.
US District Judge Haywood Gilliam granted the plaintiffs’ motion for a preliminary injunction in part, preventing US agencies from implementing Sections 1, 2, and 3(a) of a renewed 
presidential proclamation
 requiring employers filing an H-1B petition on behalf of noncitizens outside the US to pay $100,000
In his ruling, the court found that he could review the immigration policy as a potentially unauthorized exercise of delegated authority under the 
Immigration and Nationality Act
. It further found the plaintiffs were likely to succeed on their claim that the agencies failed to comply with procedural requirements. The court therefore granted the injunction until the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) completes proper 
notice-and-comment rulemaking
 under the 
Administrative Procedure Act
 and conducts analyses on the proposed rule’s impact on small businesses under the 
Regulatory Flexibility Act
.
The suit was brought by healthcare, educational, and religious organizations, along with groups representing those sectors and immigrant-rights interests. They 
highlighted
 the role of H-1B visa holders in US productivity growth, addressing shortages of healthcare professionals needed to serve an aging population, filling shortages of teachers and foreign-language instructors, and providing pastoral and missionary services.
The 
government argued
 that the H-1B program is susceptible to abuse, displacing qualified American workers and undermining the economy and national security.
President Trump initially imposed the $100,000 fee in a 
September 2025 proclamation
. In June 2026, a federal court in Massachusetts 
blocked enforcement of that fee
, and the US Court of Appeals for the First Circuit 
left that injunction
 in place. In August, DHS 
proposed a rule
 creating a similar fee. Last month, President Trump 
extended
 the original proclamation for another year.

GET OUR DAILY DIGEST

Email Address

Subscribe Key: 

Subscribe

Latest DISPATCHES

Nepal dispatch: Bhotekoshi disaster tests the limits of climate adaptation

Pakistan dispatch: Supreme Court defers jailed former PM’s medical case amid jurisdictional dispute

Latest COMMENTARY

A Baby Died After FGM in The Gambia. Why Was No One Convicted?

by 
 Santana Simiyu | Equality Now | KE

Students, Your Freedoms Are on the Line. Here’s How to Defend Them

by 
 Gary J. Simson | Mercer University School of Law | US

Latest FEATURES

‘Accountability Is Deferred Rather Than Delivered’ — Conflict Resolution Scholar Johannes Langer on Mediation, Amnesty, and the Limits of the ICC

‘Genocide denial is often a state project’ — Iva Vukušić on Srebrenica and the politics of memory

THIS DAY @ LAW

Justice Louis Brandeis died

On October 5, 1941, US Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis died at the age of 84.

Brandeis had become the first Jewish justice on the United States Supreme Court in 1916 after a hotly-contested nomination battle. Learn 
more
 about Louis Brandeis from Oyez.

Home

Attributions

Disclaimer

Privacy Policy

Contact Us

Copyright © 2026, JURIST Legal News & Research Services, Inc. 
JURISTnews is a collaboration with the University of Pittsburgh

 