URL: https://www.immigration.govt.nz/visas/argentina-working-holiday-visa/
Fecha de consulta: 2026-10-05
HTTP: 200 text/html; charset=utf-8



Argentina Working Holiday Visa » Immigration New Zealand

Argentina Working Holiday Visa :: Immigration New Zealand

Skip to main content

Skip to main navigation

Skip to secondary navigation

Skip to search

Travel disrupted by the Middle East situation

Issued:
 Monday 02 Mar 2026, 07:10 pm NZDT

We have established a priority phone line from Monday to Friday for people to contact us about this specific situation. Call 0508 558 855 (toll free from NZ landlines) or +64 9 914 4100 and press option 7. For information about what options are available to you, check:

Middle East: advice for temporary visa holders in New Zealand affected by travel disruptions

                                        Process to apply

                                        For employers

                        Login

                    Home

                        ...

                                Visas

                            Argentina Working Holiday Visa

                        Argentina Working Holiday Visa

Apply for this visa if you want to holiday, study and work in New Zealand. You must be aged 18 to 35 and a citizen of the Argentine Republic.

Length of stay

Up to

12 months

Cost

From

NZD $770

Processing time

80% within

2 weeks

Age range

18 to 35 years

Visas available

Each year

1,000

To apply you must:

be a citizen of the Argentine Republic and aged 18 to 35

have at least NZD $4,200 to pay your living expenses

have plans to leave New Zealand at the end of your stay

not have had a New Zealand working holiday visa before

have full medical insurance for the length of your stay

meet the other requirements of this visa.

This visa lets you:

holiday for up to 12 months

work in temporary jobs for up to 12 months

study or train for up to 6 months in total

travel in and out of New Zealand.

If you have a partner or child who wants to come to New Zealand, they will need to apply for their own visa.

You cannot take a permanent job on this visa.

You do not need a job offer to apply.

Changes to employment conditions

Employment conditions have been updated to be clear about what work is allowed on open visas like this one. If you are doing work that is not permitted, you can continue until your current visa expires.

Changes to employment conditions for open work visa holders

Closed

This visa is closed for 2026. You can apply next year or find other visas here.

Find and choose a visa

                        On this page

Apply online

                                    {{ item.innerText }}

On this page

                                {{ item.innerText }}

How long you can stay

You can stay in New Zealand on your working holiday visa for up to 12 months.

If you will be doing 

 in the 

 or 

 industries, you may be able to stay longer by applying for a Working Holiday Extension Work Visa.

Check the 'Staying longer' section.

Staying longer

Who can apply

To apply for this visa you must:

be aged 18 to 35

be a citizen of Argentina, with a valid passport

not have had a working holiday visa for New Zealand before, even if you did not use it

be in good health

be of good character

have a genuine reason for coming to New Zealand

have at least NZD $4,200 to cover your living expenses

have full medical insurance for your stay

have plans to leave New Zealand at the end of your stay.

Citizenship

You must be a citizen of Argentina, with a valid passport for Argentina — your passport must be valid for at least 3 months after the visa will expire.

Previous working holiday visas

We check our records for any previous working holiday visas that we may have given you.

You cannot apply if we have given you a working holiday visa before, even if you did not use the visa.

Note

You can still apply for this visa if you have had working holiday visas to work in countries other than New Zealand.

Health

You must be in good health. We may ask you to have a chest X-ray, a medical examination, or both, as proof of your good health.

Working holiday visa medical requirements

When you apply, you must answer questions about your health. This helps to decide whether you need to provide a chest X-ray or medical certificate. Even if you do not need these when you apply, we may ask for them when we process your application.

How to get an X-ray or medical examination

Character

You must be of good character.

When you apply, you must answer questions about your character. This helps to decide if you need to provide police certificates. Even if you do not need these when you apply, we may ask for them when we process your application.

If you have a criminal conviction or are a security risk to New Zealand, we may not issue you a visa.

Character requirements for New Zealand visas

Police certificates

Genuine intentions

You must have genuine reasons for coming to New Zealand.

When we decide if your intentions for coming to New Zealand are genuine, we will consider all the information that:

you provide to support your application

we have about your personal circumstances

you have previously provided to us.

Genuine intentions to visit or work in New Zealand

Enough money to live on

You must have at least NZD $4,200 to cover your living expenses while in New Zealand.

Evidence can include:

bank statements

credit card statements

bank drafts

traveller's cheques.

Medical insurance

You must have full medical insurance for the length of your stay.

We may ask you to prove that you are fully insured, including cover for a stay in hospital.

Evidence can include:

a copy of your insurance certificate

an approval letter from your insurance company.

Leaving New Zealand

We may ask to see evidence of your travel arrangements to leave New Zealand.

Evidence can include:

your ticket for travel out of New Zealand at the end of your stay to a 

, or

documents, such as bank or credit card statements, that show you have enough money to buy a ticket.

Note

The money for your ticket must be in addition to what you have to live on.

Documents you need

When you apply

When you apply, you will need to provide your passport details.

After you apply

After you apply, we may contact you and ask for:

evidence of a medical examination or chest X-ray

police certificates as proof of your good character

proof you have at least NZD $4,200 for your stay

proof you have medical insurance

a ticket to leave New Zealand at the end of your stay, or proof you have enough money to buy one.

            How to apply

Follow these steps to complete your application online.

An application containing all the documents we need will help prevent delays with processing.

1

Step 1: 
Gather your documents

The section 'Who can apply' explains the requirements for this visa and what you will need as proof.

Get documents translated

For your application you must provide:

certified English translations of police and medical certificates that are not in English, if required

scanned copies of the original documents.

Note

If your other evidence is not in English, you can provide a translated copy to help prevent delays with processing.

Documents must be translated by someone who meets our requirements for providing English translations. 

Providing English translations of supporting documents

File formats for uploading documents and photographs

Organise proof of identity, citizenship and age

You must have a passport that is valid for at least 3 months after your visa expires.

If you need a new passport, allow yourself enough time to get it.

When you apply, make sure you enter your identity details exactly as they appear on your passport or certificate of identity.

Alert

If there are any mistakes in your identity details such as an incorrect name or passport expiry date, your application will be delayed. We may also decline your application or refuse you entry to New Zealand.

Book medical appointments, if required

When you apply online, whether you need an X-ray or medical examination will depend on the health information you give us. We will contact you if we need you to organise a medical appointment.

If they are needed, evidence of a chest X-ray or medical examination must be less than 3 months old when we receive them. Allow yourself enough time to get these.

How to get an X-ray or medical examination

Apply for police certificates, if required

When we process your application, we will contact you if we require police certificates from you.

Police certificates

Your police certificates must be less than 6 months old when you submit your application. Allow yourself enough time to get these certificates.

Organise proof you have enough money to live on

You will need to show that you have at least NZD $4,200 to cover the cost of your stay.

Organise proof of your medical insurance

Documents you can show us include:

a copy of your insurance certificate

an approval letter from your insurance company.

Organise proof you can leave New Zealand

This can be a plane ticket or proof you have the money to buy one.

2

Step 2: 
Submit your application and pay the fee

You must apply online and in English.

To apply, log in to your account, or set up an account if you do not have one already.

You can then fill in your application, upload your documents and pay the applicable fees.

Check the 'How to pay and submit' section for fees.

How to pay and submit

3

Step 3: 
Wait for our decision

We let you know if we need more information.

Waiting for a visa

How long it takes to process an application

Check the 'How to pay and submit' section for timeframes.

How to pay and submit

4

Step 4: 
Check your application status

Log in to your account to check the status of your application.

We will email you when we make a decision.

If we approve your application, we will give you an eVisa and send you a copy.

Using eVisas and visa labels

Check the 'While you are in New Zealand' section to find out what you can and cannot do when you come to New Zealand.

While you are in New Zealand

How to pay and submit

When you get your visa

You must come to New Zealand within 12 months of the date your visa is issued.

Alert

You cannot delay or cancel your working holiday visa. If you do not arrive in New Zealand within 12 months, the visa expires, and you cannot apply for another working holiday visa.

Your visa is valid from:

the date you enter New Zealand, if you are outside New Zealand when we approve your application, or

the date you get your visa, if you are already in New Zealand.

When you arrive

Entry requirements

As part of New Zealand’s entry requirements, everyone must complete a New Zealand Traveller Declaration (NZTD). This form collects information about your travel, including customs, immigration, and biosecurity details.

When you can submit your NZTD depends on how you're travelling:

By air: You can submit it from 24 hours before your journey begins.

By sea: You can submit it from 24 hours before your ship leaves its last overseas port heading to New Zealand. 

If you have an NZeTA, you can specify in your declaration that you are applying for a visa on arrival.

A paper declaration form is available for travellers who cannot complete it online.

New Zealand Traveller Declaration

New Zealand Customs and Biosecurity also check that you meet their entry requirements.

Arriving in New Zealand

Alert

You can be refused entry permission if you:

are not a genuine visitor

do not meet our character requirements

have had a change in circumstances since we issued your visa

refuse to let us take your photo, fingerprints or an iris scan

cannot provide evidence of any onward travel or the money required to leave New Zealand.

Genuine intentions to visit or work in New Zealand

What might stop you from being allowed to enter New Zealand

While you are in New Zealand

Travel

After you arrive, you can travel in and out of New Zealand as many times as you like before your visa expires.

Work

You can work in any job you like, as long as:

you work for an employer under an employment contract or a contract for services

you do not get a permanent job

the work you do is legal

you do not operate a business as an owner

you do not provide commercial sexual services

you do not invest in a business that provides commercial sexual services.

Note

You do not need a job offer to apply for a working holiday visa.

Paying tax

Everyone who has a job in New Zealand pays tax on what they earn. To pay tax, you need an Inland Revenue Department (IRD) number from Inland Revenue — the New 
Zealand Government department that collects tax.

IRD numbers — Inland Revenue

Study

You can do some study or training for up to 6 months of your stay.

Staying longer

If you have completed 3 months of 

 in the 

 or 

 industries, you may be able to stay in New Zealand for another 3 months.

Working Holiday Extension Work Visa

Note

If your current temporary visa is going to expire while you are waiting for our decision, we will normally issue you an Interim Visa to let you stay in New Zealand lawfully.

Interim Visa

            Visa lookup

Search for a visa

Find and compare visas

                Visit 

                Work

                Study

                Live

                All visas

Popular information

                Contact us

                Residence

                Checking your application

                Applying for a visa

                Documents and proof

Hīkina Whakatutuki

New Zealand Government / 
Te Kāwanatanga o Aotearoa

                Glossary

                Accessibility

                Privacy

                Terms of use

                Copyright

Cookie preferences 

Crown copyright © 2026

Cookie Information

                        We use cookies on this website to show you relevant information, understand how you use the site and to ensure the site functions properly.

                                Manage your cookie preferences

                                Privacy statement

Accept all

Necessary only

Cookie preferences

Functional cookies

We have cookies that make our website
                            function correctly. You cannot opt out of these cookies.

                            Necessary

Site preferences

These cookies remember the information you
                            have entered so we can show content relevant to you based on your site preferences.

Statistics and analysis

These cookies help us collect statistics
                            and other analytical information so we can improve and manage the site.

Marketing

These cookies track your use of other
                            websites so they can provide you with more relevant and engaging advertisements.

                    {{ cookieButtonText }}

                        Privacy statement

