=== página 6 del original ===
 
 
Stormwater Trash Capture Feasibility Report 
 
 
  
 
June 2022 
6 
Schaaf & Wheeler  
CONSULTING CIVIL ENGINEERS 
 
2. Full Trash Capture Devices 
2.1 Capital Improvement Project Alternatives 
There are a variety of devices available to meet the full capture trash reduction goal, including: 
• 
Catch basin inlet filters/screens; 
• 
Netting, screens, or hydrodynamic structures on a storm drain trunk line; and 
• 
End-of-pipe netting, screens, or hydrodynamic structures. 
When selecting a device, it is important to consider the drainage area, hydraulic losses across 
the system when full, permitting requirements in open channels, device maintenance and 
access, property rights, and utility clearance. All of these factors should be weighed against the 
device, installation, and maintenance costs to ensure maximum capture volume per dollar 
spent. The current list of approved full trash capture devices is contained in Attachment 2.  
2.1.1 Large Scale Devices 
This study focuses on large scale devices as they have the capability of capturing runoff from 
Caltrans right-of-way and thus enabling possible funding sources. Large-scale devices provide a 
centralized location for construction and maintenance. The downside of large devices is that 
they capture flow from low trash generating areas resulting in the need to have a larger device 
to treat the additional runoff from areas with little trash reduction benefit.  
 
Hydrodynamic separators (HDS) are widely 
used in stormwater treatment. They are flow-
through structures with a settling or separation 
unit to remove sediments, floatables, and other 
pollutants. They come in a wide range and some 
are as small as a standard manhole structure. 
These inline systems can be cleaned using a 
vacuum truck to pump out the trash, sediment, 
and water that has collected in the bottom. 
Engineering and installation costs can be quite 
high, but the devices are long-lasting and can 
capture trash from a considerable area.   
 
Netting devices can be placed on discharge 
pipes that will collect trash. Netting systems have 
one or more mesh bags and a metal frame guide system to support the nets. When full, the 
nets can be removed and replaced with new nets. End-of-pipe systems can be installed at the 
actual discharge point to receiving water, or just a collection point. Because these nets are 
installed above ground, they must be inspected at regular intervals to find and repair any 
damage. The netting devices may also require permitting for installation and maintenance if 
they are located in the channel.  
 

=== página 9 del original ===
 
 
Stormwater Trash Capture Feasibility Report 
 
 
  
 
June 2022 
9 
Schaaf & Wheeler  
CONSULTING CIVIL ENGINEERS 
 
3. Cost Estimates and Maintenance Considerations 
3.1 Unit Costs 
The following assumptions were made in determining construction costs for each proposed 
device: 
• 
Installation costs for large-scale HDS and baffle devices are assumed to be 4 times the 
cost of the device;   
• 
Installation of netting large-scale devices are assumed to be 3 times the cost of the 
device; 
• 
Installation of louvered panels was calculated on a case-by-case basis as they are 
custom installations; 
• 
Hydrodynamic separators and baffle boxes capital cost is estimated at $3000 per 
treatment flow rate (cfs) based on recent bids; 
• 
Netting and large screen device capital costs are estimated at $2500 per treatment flow 
rate (cfs) based on recent bids; 
• 
Small scale devices (i.e. inlet screens and hanging baskets) were estimated at $2,500 
per device, based on recent quotes; 
• 
The devices are located in areas which do not require major utility relocation, property 
or easement acquisition or environmental permitting; 
• 
Large scale devices were assumed to have a lifetime of 50-years; 
• 
Small scale devices were assumed to have a lifetime of 25-years; 
• 
Total Base Cost is presented in the 2022 construction year dollars and includes 
installation, construction needed to update drainage infrastructure to support trash 
capture device, and the device. It does not include maintenance or device replacement;  
• 
20% construction contingency added to total costs 
• 
15% design added 
• 
Permitting costs were estimated for each specific site location. 
Table 4-1 lists the unit costs used to develop each of the site’s installation cost. Attachment 3 
contains details of each site quantities and total cost.  
 

=== página 10 del original ===
 
 
Stormwater Trash Capture Feasibility Report 
 
 
  
 
June 2022 
10 
Schaaf & Wheeler  
CONSULTING CIVIL ENGINEERS 
 
Table 3-1: Unit Cost Assumptions 
Item 
Cost per Unit 
Unit 
HDS or Baffle 
$3,000 
per cfs 
Netting Device 
$2,500 
per cfs 
Louvered Panel 
$500  
SF 
Connector Pipe Screen 
$2,500  
each 
Permitting for Underground  
$27,000 
lump sum 
Permitting for in channel 
$105,000 - $120,000 
lump sum 
 
3.2 Maintenance Considerations  
Cleaning and maintenance costs are not included in the installation costs. They are provided in 
this section for reference only for the MCSTOPPP consideration. Maintenance of both small-and 
large-scale devices can be done by municipal staff or hired out to a cleaning contractor. In the 
Bay Area, there is a mix of jurisdictions that perform maintenance in-house and those that 
contract out the maintenance.  
 
For cleaning, replacement, and maintenance, the following considerations should be taken: 
• 
Large scale HDS or baffle box devices are cleaned approximately three (3) times a year, 
requiring 8 hours of a team of two staff members at $100/hour, a vacuum truck at 
$400/hour, or $23,400/device annually; 
• 
Netting devices are cleaned approximately three (3) times a year, requiring 8 hours of a 
team of two staff members at $100/hour, a crane truck at $5,000/half day, replacement 
net at $1,500, or $27,300/device annually; 
• 
Louvered panels at the Rossi pump station are cleaned approximately three (3) times a 
year, requiring 4 hours of a team of two staff members at $100/hour, a vacuum truck at 
$400/hour, or $7,200/device annually; 
• 
Inlet screens are cleaned approximately three (3) times a year, requiring 4 hours of a 
team of two maintenance workers at $100/hour- or $7,200/device annually; 

=== página 23 del original ===
CONCEPTUAL DESIGN - POTENTIAL FULL TRASH SYSTEM PROJECT   
  
MCSTOPPP Full Trash Capture Feasibility Evaluation 
June 2022 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project ID: LS-028-Alt1 
Project Name: Ferry Terminal  
Project Location: City of Larkspur (37.9452, -122.5122) 
(Project drains Caltrans right-of-way area as well) 
Site/Device Information 
Proposed Device Type:  Netting Devices (See page 2 for Alternatives) 
Project Description:  Construction of an end-of-pipe netting system and concrete 
pad. The netting devices would be attached to the two 42-inch pipes discharging 
into the creek parallel to Larkspur Ferry Terminal Pathway.  
Site Specific Considerations: 
• 
Pipe outfalls have existing flap gates 
• 
Location is tidal 
• 
Channel is privately owned 
O&M Summary: May require creek drawdown for maintenance. 
Comments/Notes: GG transit owns the outfall and creek, so device installation would 
need to be coordinated. Permitting may present a challenge, however, upstream 
locations are problematic due to the high traffic along Sir Francis Drake. Upstream 
locations also miss Caltrans.  
Drainage Area and Trash Reduction Information 
Total Drainage Area: 59 acres 
• Larkspur – 54 acres 
• Caltrans Right-of-Way – 5 acres 
Priority Land Use (PLU) Areas (acres): 41 acres 
Public 
Agency 
Trash Generation 
Category 
Non- 
PLU 
Area 
Total 
Area 
Low 
Mod 
High 
Very 
High 
Larkspur 
12 
29 
0 
0 
13 
54 
Caltrans 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
5 
1-yr/1-hr Peak Flow (modeled): 24 cfs 
Preliminary Cost Estimate 
Design/ 
Permitting 
$173,000 
Construction 
$241,000 
Construction 
Contingency 
$48,300 
Total Capital 
$523,000 
Annual Operation 
& Maintenance 
$27,300/yr 
Construction Cost 
per Acre of PLU 
$8,500/ac 
Proposed Project Location 
