 Frigate+ 
 Azimuth 
 Open Menu Home 
 Frigate+ 
 Github 
 Documentation 
 Demo 
 Frigate+ Login 
 Close Menu 
 COCO Dataset 
 Frigate+ Dataset 
 Get more relevant and accurate detections with Frigate+ models
 Publicly available models are trained on standard datasets such as COCO which include somewhat random images from all sorts of scenarios. These models are trained to recognize things like gummy bears as bears.
 Frigate+ models are trained using images from actual security cameras in use by Frigate users located all over the world.
 Create an account 
 Fine tune a model with your own image submissions
 Accuracy can be further improved by uploading and annotating your own images and reporting false positives to create a model that is fine tuned to your specific camera scenes.
 You will be able to request a fine tuned model with the images you have uploaded and annotated up to 12 times with your annual subscription. Additional fine tunings can be purchased for $5 if needed. 
 More objects for your automations
 With Frigate+ models, you can use your cameras to detect if your waste bins are already out for trash day or if your robot lawnmower is running.
 It is also trained to recognize common wildlife such as foxes, raccoons, squirrels, and deer in case you want a sprinkler head to turn on in a specific zone.
 Track deliveries
 With package detection, you can track when packages arrive at your front door. Frigate+ also recognizes common logos for delivery services all over the world, so you can know when UPS, Fedex, Amazon, or DHL have arrived.
 More efficient face and license plate recognition
 Frigate now supports facial and license plate recognition in version 0.16 (currently in beta). Frigate+ models make facial and license plate recognition more efficient by detecting the location of faces and license plates at the same time as other objects. Without a Frigate+ model, secondary models need to identify faces and license plates, slowing down your processing pipeline. 
 Frigate+ Subscription
 $50/yr
 Access to Frigate+ models
 Up to 12 fine tuned models
 AI suggested labels for your uploads
 Support open source Frigate
 Create an account Login 
 Frequently Asked Questions
 I don't want another subscription. What happens if I cancel? 
 Models trained during your subscription are available for download indefinitely even if you decide not to renew. If you want a one-time purchase option, you can simply cancel your subscription and it won't renew at the end of the year.
 Do I have to upload images from my own cameras? 
 You don't have to. Subscribers have direct access to the base models trained on the images from other Frigate+ users.
 Is Frigate+ required for face or license plate recognition? 
 No. Facial and license plate recognition is built directly into Frigate starting with 0.16. This works with or without a Frigate+ subscription. Frigate+ models just improve efficiency.
 Can I train Frigate+ on any objects I want? 
 Only specific labels are supported. You can't add your own custom labels yet.
 Where can I find more detailed information? 
 For more detailed information, see the documentation .
 © Frigate, Inc. All rights reserved.  
 