 
 Images and footage | College of Policing 
 Skip to content 
 Jump to search 
 Menu
 Secondary navigation
 About us 
 News & views 
 Contact us 
 Search
 Search 
 Main navigation
 Policing guidance 
 Research 
 Career & learning 
 Support for forces 
 Ethics 
 Breadcrumb
 Home 
 APP (authorised professional practice) 
 Media and communications 
 Images and footage
 Images and footage
 Authorised Professional Practice
 Page contents 
 Page contents
 Click on the links below to jump to the respective piece of content on this page.
 On this page 
 Back to authorised professional practice 
 Media and communications 
 Guidance on engaging with the community, communication platforms and relations with the media
 Overview 
 Legal considerations 
 Corporate communications 
 Police and the media 
 Arrests, charges and judicial outcomes 
 Criminal proceedings information 
 Images and footage 
 Major incidents 
 Media briefings 
 Documentaries 
 Social media 
 Managing information disorder 
 Police under investigation 
 Freedom of information 
 Download webpage as a PDF 
 Share 
 This page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing.
 First published
 23 February 2026 
 Media and communications
 Images and footage can be released where there is a policing purpose for doing so. The release of images and footage must be lawful, necessary and proportionate.
 When images and footage are released to the media, they should be accompanied by information on copyright and conditions of use.
 Image or footage released to support a criminal investigation must be approved and verified by the senior investigating officer (SIO) or officer-in-charge (OIC). All decisions to release images or footage – and the reasons for doing so – should be recorded, along with any risk assessment, by the SIO or OIC.
 Corporate communications departments (CCDs) should have processes to regularly review the publication and appropriate archiving of images and footage on force websites and social media platforms. These processes should be introduced and applied in liaison with relevant business areas.
 Adequate safeguards should be in place to ensure the safe transmission of images and footage to avoid data breaches. Chief officers should ensure that a local force policy exists that sets out minimum requirements for this.
 For further information, go to:
 Information Commissioner’s Officer guidance on data sharing 
 Information Commissioner’s Officer guidance on video surveillance 
 Image of wanted person
 Where it is considered necessary and proportionate, an SIO or OIC can approve the release of a photograph of a wanted individual. Once the individual is apprehended, the CCD should remove the photograph from the force’s channels as soon as possible and inform the media.
 Image of missing person
 For missing persons investigations, the OIC should obtain a recent image from family or other personal connections to the missing person.
 Where a missing person has previously been in custody, their custody photograph should only be used:
 as a last resort
 where the risk of harm to the missing person is judged to outweigh the risk of using their image by the OIC investigating their missing status
 Additional guidance, including risk-assessing the level of information to be released, can be found in the Metropolitan Police Service’s Missing persons media and online publicity guidance .
 Tribute image
 The family of a deceased person can be asked to provide a photograph to the CCD for release. All images used should be verified by the OIC or family liaison officer (FLO). 
 Release of custody images
 The police are the legal copyright owner of images and are responsible for releasing an offender’s custody photograph.
 Where practicable and proportionate, press offices should be prepared to release the image of a person found guilty on the day of conviction, where there is a policing purpose or at the request of the media. This is unless there is a court order or other legitimate reason not to do so.
 Press offices should release images on all custodial sentences at the request of the media, unless exceptional reasons exist. Approval and verification processes for the release of images should be agreed locally.
 If there are legitimate reasons not to issue the image, the SIO or OIC must provide a rationale, which will be logged by the CCD. This reason should be explained to any requesting media.
 The following is a non-exhaustive list of potential exceptional reasons:
 a risk assessment has been completed and release of the image will put the person, their family or their friends at risk of harm
 reporting restrictions are in place that prevent the person’s identity from being released
 releasing the image could interfere with other ongoing proceedings, because identity is an issue
 the individual is a juvenile and reporting restrictions have not been lifted
 the individual is a vulnerable adult
 Body-worn video
 The police may wish to publish or release body-worn video (BWV) images or footage to the media for a number of reasons. This can include:
 tracing wanted suspects
 locating people who have escaped or absconded from custody
 release of materials under open justice principles
 public reassurance or confidence
 demonstrating police skill or bravery
 educational purposes
 managing misinformation, disinformation or malinformation in relation to a high-profile incident or operation
 The decision must be made on a case-by-case basis with early consultation with the CPS, where appropriate. There may be occasions where BWV footage cannot be released due to ongoing investigations or operational sensitivity.
 Release of BWV to the media or to the public should follow the  NPCC Body-worn video guidance 2024 and the  Safeguarding body-worn video data guidance. 
 Where the release relates to correcting misinformation, disinformation or malinformation, or a high-profile incident or operation, the decision should be made by the SIO or senior operational officer in consultation with the head of communications. The decision and rationale should be recorded by the officer and head of communications.
 In these circumstances, alternative methods to achieve the same aim may also be considered. For example, this may include allowing media or community leaders to view BWV on a non-reportable basis.
 Back to Media and communications overview 
 Tags
 APP 
 Was this page useful? 
 Yes 
 No 
 Do not provide personal information such as your name or email address in the feedback form. Read our privacy policy for more information on how we use this data
 What is the reason for your answer? 
 I couldn't find what I was looking for 
 I couldn't find what I was looking for
 The information wasn't relevant to me 
 The information wasn't relevant to me
 The information is too complicated 
 The information is too complicated
 Other 
 Other
 Add a comment (optional) 
 Footer
 Privacy policy 
 Cookie policy 
 Accessibility statement 
 Diversity statement 
 Copyright statement 
 Content disclaimer 
 Feedback 
 Complaints 
 © College of Policing. All content (excluding logos and photographs) is available under the Non-Commercial College Licence except where otherwise stated. (2026). 
