
=== PAGINA 1 ===
Seattle Police Manual 
16.091 – Body-Worn Video Pilot Program 
Effective Date:  DRAFT Version 01/29/2014 
16.090 POL-1 Body-Worn Video (BWV) 
This policy applies to officers who have volunteered to wear 
body-worn video equipment during the body-worn video pilot 
program.  The Memorandum of Agreement between the City of 
Seattle and the Seattle Police Officers’ Guild outlines the scope 
of the program.  The program’s primary focus is to evaluate the 
technology and equipment during field use. 
1. All Officers Operating BWV Must First Complete Training 
Before officers deploy with a BWV unit, they will complete 
Department training on the proper use of the equipment and 
procedures for uploading captured video. 
2. Officers Operating BWV Must Wear the Camera Properly 
Officers will wear the camera in a location consistent with 
Department training that allows the camera to capture events. 
3. Officers Will Wear Only BWV Equipment Issued by the Department 
Officers may not wear any personally-owned camera device for 
the purpose of recording enforcement activity.  Only those 
camera units issued by the Department are authorized. 
4. Officers Will Perform Pre-Shift Function Checks and Note Malfunctions 
At the start of the shift, officers will perform a function check as 
indicated in the BWV training. 
Any time the officer is aware of equipment malfunctions, the 
officer will: 
• 
Notify a sergeant, 
• 
Note the malfunction on the MDC/CAD log including the 
screening sergeant’s name, and 
• 
Notify IT staff for troubleshooting 
5. Officers Will Record Enforcement Activity 
Officers will activate the BWV to record enforcement activity, 
unless doing so would jeopardize officer or public safety.  
Enforcement activity is any activity other than hospital guard or 
a social contact. 

=== PAGINA 2 ===
DRAFT 
 
DRAFT  
A social contact is a voluntary, consensual encounter between 
the police and a subject with the intent of engaging in casual 
and/or non-investigative conversation. See Manual Section 
6.220-Social Contacts and Terry Stops  
If circumstances prevent BWV activation at the beginning of an 
event because doing so would jeopardize officer or public safety, 
the officer shall activate it as soon as practical. 
During the BWV Pilot Program, there will be no discipline that 
follows from not recording a particular incident. 
6. Officers Shall Notify Persons of Recording 
Officers shall notify others that they are being recorded as soon 
as practical. 
7. Officers Must Articulate a Reason for Deactivating the BWV 
Once BWV has been activated, Officers who stop recording with 
the BWV during an event must be prepared to articulate a 
legitimate reason for doing so. 
8. Officers Shall Not Intentionally Record Persons Who Are Lawfully Exercising 
a Constitutional Right or Civil Liberty 
Particular attention should be paid to SMC 14.12.010, 
14.12.020.A, and 14.12.030.K, which prohibit employees from 
intentionally recording people who are lawfully exercising their 
freedom of speech, press, association, assembly, religion, or the 
right to petition the government for redress of grievances. 
Exception: Employees may record if there is reasonable 
suspicion to believe that criminal activity has occurred or 
will occur (SMC 14.12.010). 
Exception: Protected activity which is unintentionally 
captured while enforcement-related activity is being 
recorded is not a violation of this policy (SMC 14.12.080). 
9. Employees Will Document the Existence of Video or Reason for Lack of Video 
To document that an event has been captured on BWV, 
employees will note that the event was recorded in an update 
on the MDC. 
If this policy requires that an event be recorded, and there is no 
recording, employees must note why it was not recorded. 

=== PAGINA 3 ===
DRAFT 
 
DRAFT  
Employees will note the existence or lack of video in an update 
on the MDC and any related GO report, Street Check, Notice of 
Infraction, Criminal Citation, or Traffic Contact Report (TCR). 
Officers who capture a recording of an event will log to the call, 
if not already, and note that the event was recorded by their 
BWV. 
10. Officers Shall Flag Videos of Certain Events 
If any of the following events are captured on an officer’s BWV, 
the officer shall flag the video: 
• 
Arrests 
• 
Collisions involving police vehicles 
• 
On-view criminal activity 
• 
Prisoner transports 
• 
Uses of force 
• 
Any other video the employee believes should be flagged 
11. Officers Shall Upload Recorded Video Before Going Out of Service 
Officers will upload captured video according to the training 
guidelines for the relevant unit model. 
If the upload is not complete before the end of shift, officers will 
notify a sergeant. 
 
 
16.090-POL-2 Reviewing Body-Worn Video 
This policy applies to all employees—non-sworn and sworn—who 
review body-worn video recordings. 
1. Recorded Video May Be Viewed For Appropriate Purposes Only 
Video recorded by BWV may be viewed for the following 
purposes: 
• 
Complaint 
• 
Criminal investigation 
• 
Officer-involved collision/Collision Review Board 
• 
Pursuit 
• 
Firearms Review Board 
• 
Public Disclosure Request 

=== PAGINA 4 ===
DRAFT 
 
DRAFT  
• 
Use of Force review/investigation 
• 
Performance appraisal 
• 
As part of an Early Intervention System (EIS) plan for a 
specific officer 
• 
Audit 
2. Users Shall Note the Purpose for Viewing Video 
Each vendor’s viewing application automatically logs the identity 
of a user who accesses a particular video, as well as the date 
and time of access. 
Any employee viewing a video shall manually make an entry in 
the application stating the purpose for viewing the video. 
3. Recorded Video Shall Not Be Used for Training Purposes Without Permission 
of the Involved Employee 
4. Employees Shall Not Make Copies of Recorded Video for Personal Use 
