
=== PAGINA 1 ===
John Spiros
State Representative 86th Assembly District 
—
January 31, 2024
Testimony on Assembly Bill 837
Good Afternoon, Chairman Swearingen and members of the Assembly Committee on State Affairs, and 
thank you for allowing me to testify on Assembly Bill 837. This bill allows law enforcement to charge a 
fee when redaction of video footage is necessary following an open records request.
To be clear, Assembly Bill 837 does not change access to public records that are currently available 
under the open records laws. The bill simply allows agencies to charge the requestor a fee for the actual, 
necessary, and direct cost of redacting recorded video or audio content.
Current law allows government officials or agencies to charge a fee for locating a record, reproducing or 
transcribing a record, copying or photographing a record, and mailing a record. When these provisions 
were enacted, the use of body cameras by law enforcement officers was not common.
Law enforcement agencies receive a high volume of open records requests, especially large agencies 
which receive hundreds of requests per month. When a department must redact video footage, for 
example if bystanders are in the video, it typically takes an hour and a half to redact every hour of video. 
This length, in addition to the volume of requests, puts a costly administrative burden on many 
departments. After discussing the issue with several local law enforcement leaders in my district, I have 
learned that agencies will soon be forced to redirect funds from actual policing to redacting if no action 
is taken.
This issue has previously come before the Wisconsin Supreme Court in a 2012 case, Milwaukee Journal 
Sentinel v. City of Milwaukee. The Court ruled that departments were unable to recuperate redaction 
costs given current law and precedent. However, the Court did specifically indicate that the Legislature, 
as the policy-making branch, has the authority to amend fee provisions. This bill does just that.
Assembly Bill 837 has been crafted in close coordination with law enforcement, and is supported by the 
Wisconsin Chiefs of Police Association, Badger State Sheriffs' Association, Wisconsin Sheriffs and Deputy 
Sheriffs Association, and the Fraternal Order of Police.
Again, thank you Chairman Swearingen and committee members for allowing me to testify on this 
common sense bill to support law enforcement.
State Capitol Office: Room 212 North • P.O. Box 8953 • Madison, WI53708-8953 
(608) 237-9186 • Fax: (608) 282-3686 • Toll-Free: (888) 534-0086 • Rep.Spiros@Iegis.wisconsin.gov

=== PAGINA 2 ===
STATE SENATOR JESSE
January 31st, 2024
Representative Swearingen, Chair
Members of the Assembly Committee on State Affairs
Testimony on 2023 Assembly Bill 837 
Relating to: fees for redacting certain records of law enforcement agencies.
Thank you, Chairman Swearingen and other members of the committee, for hearing my testimony on Assembly 
Bill 837 today. Government transparency is something we aim to uphold every day in our jobs. As government 
employees, we are subject to open records laws that we must abide by, and local law enforcement departments are 
no exception.
Many law enforcement agencies receive a fair number of open records requests, with the amount varying per 
agency. Larger agencies can sometimes fulfil hundreds of requests per month. Unless you have an employee 
dedicated solely to locating, redacting, and sending out records, this can be a particularly tedious and time 
consuming task for members of the department to complete.
I want to focus on one specific part of that process: redacting. Police department records contain a wide range of 
information that is considered exempt from open records law that would need to be redacted before the items of the 
fulfilled request are sent. This information includes records that would contain personally-identifiable information 
that is connected to a complaint or investigation or that would endanger the individual’s life or safety, reveal the 
identity of a confidential informant, endanger the security of any state prison, jail, or other secured facilities, or 
compromise the rehabilitation of an individual in custody. For law enforcement agencies with body camera footage, 
redacting this information in videos can take on average 1.5 hours for every hour of the video. Depending on the 
request itself, and the total amount of requests an agency has at a given time, fulfilling the request could take up 
valuable agency time, especially for departments that are already understaffed.
Current law allows government officials or agencies to charge the requester of the records for the actual, necessary, 
and direct cost incurred to locate, if the costs exceeds $50. This bill would allow law enforcement and corrections 
agencies to charge the requester a fee for the actual, necessary, and direct cost of redacting, by pixilation or other 
means, recorded video content disclosed in a response to the open records request. This would help law enforcement 
agencies recuperate some of the time and resources spent on these administrative tasks.
Being a law enforcement officer, I know firsthand how our law enforcement departments and agencies can be 
scrutinized, especially in the last few years. They face open records request constantly, and while they are happy to 
fulfill them to keep our government open and transparent, they would appreciate an opportunity to be properly 
compensated for that time. Thank you, and I will take any questions at this time.
Respectfully,
Senator Jesse James
23rd Senate District
Sen.James@legis.wisconsin.gov
----------------------------------- PO Box 7882 • Madison, Wl 53707-7882 
-----------------------------------
(608] 266-7511 • (888] 437-9436 • Sen.James(a)legis.wisconsin.gov • www.SenJesseJames.com

=== PAGINA 3 ===
January 31, 2024
To: 
Chairman Swearingen and Members of the Assembly Committee on State Affairs
From: Wisconsin Chiefs of Police Association
Re: 
Support Assembly Bill 837, Fees for redacting certain records of law enforcement
agencies
Chairman Swearingen and members of the committee, thank you for your willingness to 
hold a hearing on this legislation. We would also like to thank Senator James and 
Representative Spiros for authoring this legislation. As well as committee members 
Callahan and Ohnstad for co-sponsoring the legislation.
Assembly Bill 837 would allow law enforcement agencies to charge a fee for staff time 
when redaction of body camera footage is required, by state statute, when processing an 
open records request. This proposal makes no other changes to the current statutorily 
defined open records process and does not impact access to records.
Current law prescribes when fees can be charged while processing an open records 
request. Fees may be charged for locating a record, reproducing, or transcribing a record, 
copying, or photographing a record, and mailing a record.
Many law enforcement agencies receive a high volume of open records requests. Some 
larger agencies receive hundreds of monthly requests, often including requests for 
multiple videos. Video redaction typically takes 1.5 hours for every hour of video.
The volume of requests involving video footage has been increasing. There has been a 
corresponding increase in staff time dedicated to processing and fulfilling this increased 
workload. Some departments have reported losing an average of $8,000 per month in 
staff time. While others now have staff solely dedicated to fulfilling requests.
We are before you with this request after the 2012 Wisconsin Supreme Court ruling in 
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel v. City of Milwaukee. The Justices found that “Such costs do 
not fit within the fees set forth in Wis. Stat. § 19.35(3)(a)-(d). ”
Law enforcement strongly believes in and supports an individual’s ability to receive 
information. This legislation does not impact access to this information. What the 
legislation does is include video redaction of statutorily prohibited information in the list 
of actions that are allowable charges when an open records request is fulfilled.

=== PAGINA 4 ===
I want to be clear; my colleagues and I are dedicated to keeping our communities safe. 
The taxpayer dollars dedicated to fulfilling these time-consuming requests are dollars that 
cannot be allocated to officer training or other public safety investments to improve and 
protect our communities.
We believe that the passage of AB 837 will improve the open records process for all 
parties. Among the many reasons for this belief are:
• Allow adequate resource allocation within the department through cost recovery 
of staff time dedicated to processing requests
• Discourage frivolous requests for video footage, but retain the ability for 
responsible requesters to receive records
• Reducing frivolous requests leads to more efficient processing of legitimate 
requests for records
In addition to the Chiefs, this legislation is supported by the Badger State Sheriffs’ 
Association, the Wisconsin Sheriffs and Deputy Sheriffs Association, and the Wisconsin 
State Fraternal Order of Police.
Thank you again for your attention to this matter and I would be happy to take questions 
at this time.

=== PAGINA 5 ===
To:
From:
Members, Assembly Committee on Judiciary and Public Safety 
Badger State Sheriffs’ Association (BSSA)
Wisconsin Sheriffs and Deputy Sheriffs Association (WS&DSA) 
January 31, 2024
Testimony in Support of Assembly Bill 837
Date:
RE:
The Badger State Sheriffs’ Association and Wisconsin Sheriffs and Deputy Sheriffs Association 
respectfully submit our support for AB 837. This bill will allow law enforcement and corrections 
agencies to recoup costs associated with redacting recorded content in response to a public 
records request.
Complying with public record requests in accordance with the Open Records Law is a common 
occurrence for law enforcement agencies. As technology has become more mainstream, law 
enforcement agencies now receive numerous requests for video of body cameras and dash cam 
footage. Redaction involves editing or obscuring certain parts of a video, such as faces, license 
plates, or other identifying information, to prevent the disclosure of sensitive details or to ensure 
compliance with privacy laws. This process helps balance the need for transparency with the 
need to protect individuals' identities and sensitive information.
For example, one Wisconsin sheriff recently reported that they are being inundated with requests 
for squad/body camera video from YouTubers who make money by sharing law enforcement 
videos on their YouTube channel. In fact, the YouTubers submitted six requests over the course 
of one night! These types of requests put a huge strain on resources and several agencies have 
had to hire new clerical staff to comply. In another recent example, a Sheriff stated that after a 
fatal crash, his agency spent a tremendous amount of time redacting portions of the video to 
protect the victim.
AB 837 will ensure law enforcement agencies can recoup costs associated with the “actual, 
necessary, and direct cost of redacting.” This will help alleviate the financial strain and support 
the resources to fulfil the requests to comply with constitutional, statutory, or common law.
Thank you for your consideration of this bill.
The Badger State Sheriffs ’ Association represents all of Wisconsin’s 72 elected county sheriffs. 
The Wisconsin Sheriffs and Deputy Sheriffs Association is a professional organization 
representing over 1,000 members, including sheriffs, deputies, and jail officers. Our 
organizations have a joint legislative committee and work closely on public safety issues of 
concern to our members.
