

GOV.UK Chat: Understanding and addressing jailbreaking in our generative AI experiment – Inside GOV.UK

Skip to main content

Blog
:

Inside GOV.UK

Organisations:

Government Digital Service

Search blog

                            This blog post was published under the 
2024 to 2026 Starmer government

https://insidegovuk.blog.gov.uk/2024/11/05/gov-uk-chat-understanding-and-addressing-jailbreaking-in-our-generative-ai-experiment/

GOV.UK Chat: Understanding and addressing jailbreaking in our generative AI experiment

Posted by: 

The GOV.UK AI Team
, 	
Posted on:

5 November 2024

	-

Categories:

How we work
, 
What we're working on

As the Government Digital Service (GDS) launches 
an experimental pilot of GOV.UK Chat
 this month, we want to share our thinking about a complex topic: the potential for Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems to be manipulated to produce unintended and sometimes harmful outputs, often referred to as “jailbreaking”.

GDS is committed to enhancing the digital experience on GOV.UK, so that people’s experience of interacting with government becomes more convenient and timesaving.

One way GDS is doing this is through experimenting to see if and how generative AI can improve the user experience of GOV.UK. But while we’re excited about the potential of AI to make it easier for people to access government information and give them time back, it’s crucial to acknowledge both the opportunities and the challenges this technology presents.

What is jailbreaking?

“Jailbreaking” is deliberately pursuing ways to manipulate Large Language Models (LLMs) into producing inappropriate or harmful content, often for malicious purposes. No LLM model is immune to this risk - and GOV.UK Chat, as an LLM-based application, is no exception. We’re not shying away from this reality. We've already encountered this ourselves during rigorous internal testing.

But it is important to note that a typical user of the tool is highly unlikely to see that type of output. Users do not have to be concerned that they will see any harmful content by interacting with GOV.UK Chat in everyday ways. These responses will only be produced by people who want to make the technology misbehave, by forcing these results.

Minimising the risk

We are taking clear steps to address this concern. We’ve invested heavily in safeguards to minimise the risk of harmful outputs, including:

improving GOV.UK Chat’s guardrails - informed by the results of earlier testing, we’ve strengthened measures to detect and block the output of potentially inappropriate or harmful content

collaboration with experts - we’ve been working with leading technical specialists across government, including colleagues at the 
Incubator for Artificial Intelligence
 (i.AI) and the 
AI Safety Institute
, to ensure we’re using best practices and staying ahead of common attacks

close monitoring - our team will be actively monitoring the system throughout the pilot, learning from real-world usage patterns and adapting our safeguards as needed

We’ll continue to refine these measures based on real-world usage. Our aim is to balance utility with safety, and we are working with colleagues at the AI Safety Institute - which, like GDS, is part of the Department for Science, Innovation and Technology - to help us get this balance right.

Even with these measures in place, however, we acknowledge that jailbreaking GOV.UK Chat remains a possibility.

The value of testing with real users

Ultimately, testing GOV.UK Chat is about learning, improving and understanding how people interact with AI in real-life scenarios. We think this is the best way to prove and develop a new technology that could make it easier and quicker for people to navigate complex information about government.

As we highlighted earlier, we cannot totally prevent deliberate malicious activity - but please be reassured that this will not affect your ability to try a tool we hope you will find useful as a way of accessing the information and services you need. By testing it in the open, with your help, we can better identify and address any limitations or vulnerabilities, creating a more robust and safer AI tool for everyone to use.

Subscribe to Inside GOV.UK
 to find out more about our work.

Tags:

AI
, 
GOV.UK AI experiments

We’re running a private beta of GOV.UK Chat

How we’re designing GOV.UK Chat

Sharing and comments

Share this page

X (formerly Twitter)

Facebook

LinkedIn

Email

1 comment

Comment by

Tarun Sharma

posted on 

16 November 2024

It's great to see GDS exploring the potential of AI to improve user experience while maintaining strong safeguards. Balancing innovation with security is crucial, and your commitment to transparency and collaboration with experts is commendable.

Looking forward to seeing how GOV.UKChat evolves and enhances the way we interact with government services. Keep up the great work.

Link to this comment

Related content and links

Inside GOV.UK
A blog about running and improving GOV.UK, for anyone who is working on GOV.UK or interested in how the digital home of the UK government works. Written by the Government Digital Service team.

Subscribe to Inside GOV.UK

Subscribe to Inside GOV.UK
 to keep up to date with our work.

Categories
Categories

Select Category

Accessibility  (4)

Best practice  (95)

Content  (78)

Data  (16)

Events  (37)

Finding things  (29)

GDS team  (16)

How we work  (140)

Incident reports  (28)

Product changes  (171)

Transition  (51)

Uncategorized  (1)

User insights  (102)

Vision and plans  (37)

What we're working on  (134)

Working with us  (87)

Standards and guidelines

Read GOV.UK 
standards and guidelines
 on blogs, URLs, service requests, Welsh, logos and more.

Sign up and manage updates

Email

Atom

Follow GOV.UK on social media
GOV.UK on Facebook

GOV.UK on Instagram

GOV.UK on Threads

GOV.UK on X

GOV.UK on YouTube

Follow GDS on social media
GDS on Instagram

GDS on LinkedIn

Download the GOV.UK app

The GOV.UK app went live in public beta in July 2025. Find out how to 
download it for free on GOV.UK
.

Recent posts

Designing GOV.UK Chat for the GOV.UK app

19 August 2026

Launching GOV.UK's new content and publishing guidance

8 June 2026

Developing GOV.UK Chat: Our data science and AI engineering journey

15 May 2026

Why GOV.UK APIs are changing and how you can get involved

7 April 2026

5 things we learned testing GOV.UK Chat: an AI assistant for government

16 March 2026

Comments and moderation

Read our guidelines
.

Useful links

All GOV.UK blogs

All GOV.UK blog posts

GOV.UK

All departments

Accessibility statement

Cookies

All content is available under the 
Open Government Licence v3.0
, except where otherwise stated

© Crown copyright

