=== página 1 ===
WHO Global standard
for safe listening
venues & events

=== página 2 ===

=== página 3 ===
WHO Global standard
for safe listening
venues & events

=== página 4 ===
WHO global standard for safe listening venues and events
ISBN 978-92-4-004311-4 (electronic version) 
ISBN 978-92-4-004312-1 (print version)
© World Health Organization 2022
Some rights reserved. This work is available under the Creative Commons  
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO licence (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO;  
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo). 
Under the terms of this licence, you may copy, redistribute and adapt the work for 
non-commercial purposes, provided the work is appropriately cited, as indicated 
below. In any use of this work, there should be no suggestion that WHO endorses any 
specific organization, products or services. The use of the WHO logo is not permitted. 
If you adapt the work, then you must license your work under the same or equivalent 
Creative Commons licence. If you create a translation of this work, you should add 
the following disclaimer along with the suggested citation: “This translation was not 
created by the World Health Organization (WHO). WHO is not responsible for the 
content or accuracy of this translation. The original English edition shall be the binding 
and authentic edition”. 
Any mediation relating to disputes arising under the licence shall be conducted in 
accordance with the mediation rules of the World Intellectual Property Organization 
(http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/mediation/rules/).
Suggested citation. WHO global standard for safe listening venues and events. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2022. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO.
Cataloguing-in-Publication (CIP) data. CIP data are available  
at http://apps.who.int/iris.
Sales, rights and licensing. To purchase WHO publications, see http://apps.who.
int/bookorders. To submit requests for commercial use and queries on rights and 
licensing, see https://www.who.int/copyright. 
Third-party materials. If you wish to reuse material from this work that is attributed 
to a third party, such as tables, figures or images, it is your responsibility to determine 
whether permission is needed for that reuse and to obtain permission from the 
copyright holder. The risk of claims resulting from infringement of any third-party-
owned component in the work rests solely with the user.
General disclaimers. The designations employed and the presentation of the 
material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on 
the part of WHO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of 
its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted and 
dashed lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet 
be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not 
imply that they are endorsed or recommended by WHO in preference to others of a 
similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of 
proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by WHO to verify the information 
contained in this publication. However, the published material is being distributed 
without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the 
interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall WHO be 
liable for damages arising from its use. 
Design and layout by 400 communications.

=== página 5 ===
Contents
Acknowledgements
v
Executive summary
vii
Introduction
1
How excessive sound exposure affects hearing
2
Hearing loss prevention through safe listening
4
Current status of safe listening policies and regulations for  
entertainment venues and events
5
Purpose and scope of the Global standard for safe listening venues  
and events
6
Implementation of the Global standard for safe listening venues  
and events
7
Definitions of terms used in the safe listening features
8
Feature 1: Sound level limit
15
F1.1 	 Key elements
16
F1.2	 Applicability
18
F1.3 	 Peak sound levels
18
F1.4 	Roles and responsibilities
19
F1.5 	 Considerations
20
Feature 2: Monitoring the sound level
24
F2.1 	 Key elements
25
F2.2 	Measurement equipment and procedure
26
F2.3 	Measurement position and the use of a correction 
29
Feature 3: Venue acoustics and sound-system design
31
F3.1 	 Key elements
32
F3.2 	Venue acoustics
33
F3.3 	Room modes
35
F3.4 	Acoustics of the stage area
35
F3.5 	Acoustics of outdoor venues
36
F3.6 	Sound-system design
36
F3.7 	Exclusion zones in front of loudspeakers
38
F3.8 	Management of on-stage sound
38
 
iii

=== página 6 ===
Feature 4: Personal hearing protection
39
F4.1 	 Key elements
40
F4.2 	Performance requirements
43
F4.3	 Provision at venues and events
44
Feature 5: Quiet zones
46
F5.1 	 Key elements
47
F5.2 	Acoustic conditions within quiet zones
49
F5.3 	Alternative ways of offering respite from high sound levels
50
Feature 6: Provision of training and information
53
F6.1 	 Key elements
54
F6.2 	Training
55
F6.3 	Information for audiences
55
F6.4 	Identification as a “safe listening venue” or “safe listening event”
56
Adoption and implementation of the WHO Standard  
for Safe Listening Venues and Events
57
References
62
Annex 1. 	 A taxonomy of music venues 
69
Annex 2. 	 Application of the WHO Noise Guidelines for  
the European Region to the sound level limit 
71
Annex 3. 	 Spectrum of live sound and types of sound  
level measurements 
75
Annex 4. 	 The importance of calibration 
80
Annex 5. 	 Location of sound level measurement 
82
Annex 6. 	 Procedure for determining the required  
correction for sound measurement 
86
Annex 7. 	 Suitable reverberation times for amplified  
music and acoustic treatment 
88
Annex 8. 	 Low-frequency acoustic issues 
95
Annex 9. 	 Sound distribution for safe listening 
99
Annex 10. 	Sound levels close to loudspeakers 
103
Annex 11. 	 Reducing on-stage sound levels
105
iv
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 7 ===
Acknowledgements
This Global standard for safe listening venues and events is the outcome 
of a global consultative process led by the World Health Organization 
(WHO), as part of its Make Listening Safe initiative. The standard was 
drafted by Shelly Chadha, WHO, and Ian Wiggins, Senior Research Fellow, 
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences at the University of Nottingham, 
in close collaboration with a technical working group. The team was 
under the guidance of Alarcos Cieza, Bente Mikkelsen and Ren Minghui.
Members of the technical working group who contributed to the 
development and review of this global standard include Anya della 
Croce (PETZI, Swiss federation for non-profit music clubs and festivals); 
Nicola Diviani (Senior Research Fellow, Swiss Paraplegic Research, 
Lecturer, University of Lucerne, Switzerland); Raphael Elmiger (Federal 
Office of Public Health; Consumer Protection Directorate, Switzerland); 
Dorte Hammershøi (Professor, Department of Electronic Systems, 
Aalborg University, Denmark); Adam Hill (Associate Professor of 
Electroacoustics, University of Derby, United Kingdom); Ricky Kej 
(Grammy Award-winning composer and musician, India); Michael 
Kinzel (Global Segment Manager Live & Entertainment Venues, d&b 
audiotechnik); Marcel Kok (CEO, dBcontrol, The Netherlands); Mark 
Laureyns (Audiologist, Lecturer, Thomas More University College, 
Belgium, and President of the European Association of Hearing 
Aid Professionals); Amarilis Meléndez M (ENT, Chair Department of 
Otorhinolaryngology, Hospital Santo Tomas, Panama); Johannes Mulder 
(Music Technologist and Senior Lecturer, Australian National University); 
Rick Neitzel (Professor, Environmental Health Sciences and Global  
Public Health, University of Michigan, United States); Aderinola Olopade 
(CEO, Earcare Foundation Africa, Nigeria); Cory Portnuff (Audiologist, 
Assistant Clinical Professor, University of Colorado, United States); 
Janko Ramuscak (Senior Consultant, d&b audiotechnik); Sara Rubinelli 
(Professor, Health Communication, University of Lucerne and Swiss 
Paraplegic Research, Switzerland); Fiona Salter (Public Health Media 
Consultant, United Kingdom).
v

=== página 8 ===
Additional technical contributions and review of the draft standard was 
provided by Elizabeth Beach (former Head, Department of Behavioural 
Sciences, National Acoustic Laboratories, Australia); Jonathan Burton 
(Senior Lecturer in Sound, Lights and Live Event Technology, College 
of Science and Engineering, University of Derby, United Kingdom); 
Etienne Corteel (Director of Education & Scientific Outreach, L-Acoustics, 
France); Audrey Guerre (Coordinator, Live DMA, France); Sharon G 
Kujawa (Professor of Otoloaryngology, Harvard Medical School; Director 
of Audiology Research and Senior Scientist, Massachusetts Eye and 
Ear, United States); Jan de Laat (Medical Physicist, Audiologist, Leiden 
University Medical Center, The Netherlands); Ken Liston (Nottingham Trent 
University, Confetti Institute of Creative Technologies); Isabelle Naegelen 
Schengen (Environment Agency, Luxembourg); Michael Santucci 
(President, Sensaphonics Ltd and Member, Audio Engineering Society, 
United States); Robert Shepheard (Consultant Audiologist, Spire Norwich 
Hospital, United Kingdom and British Association for Performing Arts 
Medicine); Bård Støfringsdal (Chief Specialist, Acoustics, Sound and Video 
Systems, COWI AS, Norway); Kjetil F. Wevling (Director of Education and 
Competence, Kulturrom, Norway).
The document benefitted from contributions by the following WHO 
staff: Malachi Arunda; Ayrton Michael Hogan; Dorota Iwona Jarosińska; 
Kaloyan Kamenov; and Annette Pruss-Ustun. 
vi
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 9 ===
WHO estimates that over one billion young people 
globally are at risk of hearing loss due to sound 
exposure in recreational settings. The risk of 
permanent hearing injury due to unsafe listening1  
is both avoidable, and costly.
In the face of this growing threat, governments, public-health 
agencies, those involved in the creation, distribution and 
amplification of music, the private sector, civil society, and other 
stakeholders, all have a duty of care in understanding the sound 
levels to which audiences and consumers are being exposed, and 
creating environments that facilitate safe listening behaviours.
To address this, WHO, as part of their Make Listening Safe initiative, 
developed the Global standard for safe listening venues and events 
(“the Standard”) which provides a common understanding of 
safe listening in entertainment venues and events. The Standard 
comprises six “features” which, when implemented, allow audience 
members around the world to enjoy amplified music with protection 
of their hearing, while also preserving the integrity of the artistic 
experience:
Feature 1: Sound level limit:2  below 100 dB LAeq, 15 min 
An upper limit of 100 dB LAeq, 15 min is imposed, keeping sound safe  
and enjoyable for the audience.
Feature 2: Sound level monitoring 
Live monitoring of sound levels is performed by a designated  
staff member using calibrated equipment.
Executive summary
1	 “Unsafe listening” refers to the common practices of listening to music or other 
audio content at high levels or for prolonged time periods.
2	 Informed by the WHO Environmental Noise Guidelines for the European Region 
and WHO-ITU Global standard for safe listening personal audio systems.
vii

=== página 10 ===
Feature 3: Venue acoustics and sound systems
Sound system and venue acoustics are optimized ensuring safe listening 
and improved sound quality. 
Feature 4: Personal hearing protection 
Hearing protection, such as earplugs, with appropriate instructions,  
are available to audience members.
Feature 5: Quiet zones 
Designated quiet spaces are available, allowing audience members to 
rest their ears and thereby decrease the risk of hearing damage.
Feature 6: Appropriate training and information 
Both audience members and staff are made aware of practical steps 
they can take to ensure safe listening. 
The recommendations within the Global standard for safe listening 
venues and events can be implemented by:
•	Governments: through development of legislation or regulation 
by appropriate government departments, followed by compliance 
monitoring and public awareness campaigns. Hearing loss is a growing 
public health issue and its prevention will both improve quality of life 
and yield productivity gains.
•	Owners/Managers of venues and events: some or all of the features 
can be adopted voluntarily. Protecting the hearing of patrons and 
improving their listening experience makes sound business sense  
for an industry reliant on customers’ hearing ability.
•	Acousticians/Engineers/Musicians/Event Organizers and others: 
The need for this Standard, its benefits and features, can be formally 
taught to those involved in the creation of music and the running of 
entertainment venues or events. Limiting the risk of hearing damage 
will not only benefit audiences, but also those working in these 
environments.
viii
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 11 ===
Introduction
Listening to music using headphones or  
earphones, and attending venues or events that 
feature amplified music, are recreational activities 
enjoyed by millions of people every day. However, 
listening to music at high sound levels involves 
both pleasure and risks.
There is growing concern about the rising exposure to high  
sound levels in recreational settings, as regular participation  
in such activities poses the threat of irreversible hearing loss (1–10).
WHO estimates that over 1 billion young people around the world are 
exposed to an avoidable risk of hearing injury due to sound exposure 
in recreational settings (see Box 1). In the face of this growing threat, 
governments, public-health agencies, those involved in the creation, 
distribution and amplification of music, manufacturers of equipment 
and audio devices, civil society, and other stakeholders, have a duty 
of care to understand the sound levels to which audiences and 
consumers are being exposed, and to create an environment that 
facilitates safe listening behaviours.
1

=== página 12 ===
Box 1: 
WHO estimates of risk due to unsafe  
listening practices 
WHO estimates reveal that (10):
•	More than 430 million people (5% of the global population) live 
with disabling hearing loss resulting from a range of causes. This 
number is projected to increase substantially in the next decades 
unless action is taken to mitigate the risk factors for hearing loss.
•	1.1 billion young people worldwide could be at risk of hearing loss 
as a result of unsafe listening practices. 
•	Among teenagers and young adults aged 12–35 years in middle- 
and high-income countries:
	– nearly 40% are exposed to potentially damaging sound levels in 
recreational venues such as nightclubs, discotheques, and bars.
	– nearly 50% face the risk of hearing loss due to listening at high 
volumes or for prolonged time periods over their personal  
audio systems.
To address the threat posed by unsafe listening, WHO launched the 
Make Listening Safe initiative3 in 2015. The overall vision of the initiative 
is a world in which people of all ages enjoy listening with protection 
of their hearing; the aim is to reduce the risk of hearing loss posed by 
unsafe exposure to high sound levels in recreational settings. As part of 
this initiative, in 2019, WHO and the International Telecommunication 
Union launched the WHO-ITU Global standard for safe listening with 
personal audio devices and systems. The present standard, the Global 
standard for safe listening venues and events, was developed by WHO 
to address the risk of hearing loss due to amplified music in venues and 
at events, such as nightclubs, discotheques, bars, concerts, and festivals.
How excessive sound exposure affects hearing
Repeated exposure to sound at high levels, for long durations, 
permanently injures the delicate workings of the inner ear (as illustrated 
in Figure 1). The most vulnerable parts of the ear include the cochlear 
outer hair cells, which make faint sounds audible by amplifying the ear’s 
response to them, and the synaptic connections between inner hair 
cells and the auditory nerve fibers which carry sound information to  
the brain (11). 
3	 WHO’s Make Listening Safe Initiative. 2015.  
See: https://www.who.int/activities/making-listening-safe.
2
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 13 ===
Figure 1: 
Damage to sensory cells in the ear from repeated 
exposure to high sound levels.
Damaged
sensory cells
Normal
sensory cells
Injuries to the inner ear result in a variety of symptoms, which, if 
unaddressed, can significantly worsen a person’s quality of life and 
have long-term consequences for their mental health and well-being. 
Over-exposure to sound may result in hearing loss, tinnitus (ringing or 
humming in the ears), or both. Hearing loss due to excessive sound 
exposure may range from mild to profound (12), and lead to:
	– difficulty understanding speech, especially in background noise.
	– degraded hearing quality, e.g. distortion of sounds, lack of clarity.
	– difficulty telling sounds apart, such as the different instruments  
in a mix. 
Any type of sound can cause permanent hearing loss if listened to  
at a sufficiently high level and length of time. Although this is usually 
referred to as noise-induced hearing loss, it can occur from listening  
to deeply enjoyable music as much as it can from exposure to industrial 
noise (hence the commonly used alternatives, “sound-induced hearing 
loss” or “music-induced hearing loss”). Indeed, many musicians and 
other people working in the music industry have suffered career-ending 
hearing injury due to over-exposure to high sound levels (13).
Symptoms may appear short-lived, for example, a temporary hearing 
loss or tinnitus that resolves in a matter of hours or days. However, even 
when short-term symptoms fully resolve, progressive and irreversible 
injury to the inner ear may continue for months afterwards (14).  
Evidence also suggests that over-exposed ears age more quickly  
than non-exposed ears (15–17). 
 
3

=== página 14 ===
Pure-tone audiometry – the current gold-standard test used to assess 
hearing by doctors and audiologists – is sensitive to some, but not all, 
forms of injury that over-exposure to high sound levels inflicts on the  
ear (18, 19). At times, the hearing loss caused by over exposure to high 
sound levels may remain undetectable by routine audiometric tests, 
resulting in a “hidden hearing loss” (20, 21). It is likely that many people 
struggle with hidden hearing loss; in younger age groups it may occur 
due to exposure to high sound levels in recreational settings (22).
Hearing loss caused by exposure to high sound levels is mostly 
irreversible. Although people with such hearing loss may benefit from 
hearing aids or cochlear implants, there is currently no cure for this 
condition. Since lifestyle-induced hearing loss adds to the significant 
natural decline in hearing function due to ageing (16), it is critical for 
individuals to preserve their hearing by caring for their ears.
Hearing loss prevention through safe listening
“Safe listening” refers to a set of practices and behaviours that promote 
the enjoyment of amplified music while reducing the risk of permanent 
hearing injury. Adopting safe listening practices at venues and events 
supports audience members to continue enjoying music into the future.
The risk to hearing is dictated by a combination of sound level and 
cumulative duration of exposure (see Box 2). In the recreational context, 
listening can be made safer by:
i)		
reducing the sound level; and/or
ii)	
reducing the duration of exposure; and/or
iii)	
reducing the frequency of exposure (i.e. being exposed less often).
Box 2: 
The equal energy principle 
The equal energy principle (23, 24) states that the total effect of 
sound is proportional to the total amount of sound energy received 
by the ear, irrespective of the distribution of that energy over time 
– i.e. equal amounts of sound energy are expected to cause equal 
amounts of hearing loss, regardless of how and when the exposure 
occurs. The amount of energy doubles for every 3 dB increase in 
sound intensity. Hence, a person may receive the same “sound 
dose” listening to music at 80 dB for 8 hours a day as listening to 
100 dB for 5 minutes.
4
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 15 ===
Simple steps that individuals can take to reduce their personal sound 
exposure include using hearing protection (earplugs), and periodically 
seeking a quieter space to allow the ears to rest. Several of the safe 
listening features in this Standard aim to make these options more 
accessible to audience members.
To achieve a more widespread reduction in risk, it is necessary to control, 
and in some cases reduce, sound levels at venues and events. The 
effective control of sound levels requires buy-in from stakeholders at all 
levels. This includes the development and implementation of evidence-
based policies and regulations on the part of governments, the adoption 
of sound-control measures by venue operators and events professionals, 
and the cooperation and education of performers, technicians, and 
sound engineers.
Current status of safe listening policies and regulations for 
entertainment venues and events
While many countries have introduced legislation to protect the hearing 
of employees in the workplace, to date, relatively few have made 
provision to protect the hearing of audiences in entertainment venues 
(25, 26). In 2018, 18 jurisdictions (referring to countries or specific regions 
within a country) around the world were found to have regulations, 
policies, or legislation to prevent hearing loss due to sound exposure in 
entertainment venues. 
The most detailed and comprehensive examples of policies and 
regulations designed to protect the hearing of patrons and audience 
members are found in European nations (including Austria, Belgium, 
Czechia, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and 
Switzerland), although more limited requirements also apply in some 
regions of North and South America. Features commonly reflected in 
the available regulations include:
•	an upper sound level limit 
•	a requirement for real-time sound level monitoring
•	provision of earplugs 
•	provision of rest (quiet) zones
•	provision of information/warnings.
The specific requirements vary between countries, with a lack of 
standardization across the world. To address this gap, WHO has worked 
with stakeholders in the field to create a global standard of uniform, 
evidence-based recommendations. 
 
5

=== página 16 ===
Purpose and scope of the Global standard for safe listening  
venues and events
The purpose of this Standard is to provide a common understanding 
of safe listening features for entertainment venues and events. These 
features are designed to allow audience members worldwide to enjoy 
amplified music with protection of their hearing, while also preserving 
the integrity of the artistic experience.
This Standard applies to all recreational venues and events at which 
enjoyment of amplified music is a central purpose of attendance, from 
large multiday festivals to small innercity bars and clubs (see Annex 1 
for the full range of venues covered). While each venue or event poses 
different challenges and may demand unique solutions, the same 
principles, and the safe listening features of this Standard, are intended 
to apply to all types of venues and events.
This Standard is designed to protect the hearing of audience members 
attending venues and events for recreational purposes only. Staff and 
other people attending in a professional capacity are not covered, and 
should be afforded protection under occupational noise regulations. 
Likewise, the Standard does not address issues of noise annoyance to 
neighbouring properties: these issues are dealt with separately through 
environmental noise regulations and planning policy. Nevertheless, the 
effective control of sound levels within a venue or event may partially 
ameliorate noise complaints from neighbours. 
It is important to note that the proposed safe listening features in 
this Standard are designed to reduce to an acceptable level the risk 
of sound-induced hearing injury. Eliminating all risk entirely could be 
achieved only through imposing a sound level limit which would be 
unacceptably low for both audiences and performers, and unfeasible to 
implement in most live-music contexts (27). Individuals who frequently 
attend venues or events involving amplified music, or who have a  
pre-existing vulnerability, should take additional precautions to protect 
their hearing.
Development of the Global standard for safe listening venues  
and events
The Global standard for safe listening venues and events was  
developed through a collaborative process led by WHO with 
participation of diverse stakeholder groups, including musicians, 
venue operators, event organizers, professional bodies, consumer 
groups, international standards bodies, government agencies, and 
nongovernmental organizations. Inputs were received from experts  
in the fields of audiology, otology, public health, epidemiology,  
acoustics, and sound engineering.
6
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 17 ===
The central feature of this Standard concerns the application of a  
sound level limit applied to the context of entertainment venues and 
events and is based on the WHO environmental noise guidelines for the 
European region (23) (see Annex 2). The remaining supportive features 
were informed by expert opinion and the following:
i)		
a review of existing evidence from the scientific literature;
ii)	
consultation and in-depth interviews with professionals from 
across the music industry;
iii)	
an online survey exploring the attitudes of people who attend 
music venues and events, delivered in English, French, Chinese, 
Russian, and Spanish; and
iv)	
open information sessions, consultations, and calls for contribution 
from partners including case studies and examples.
Implementation of the Global standard for safe listening venues  
and events
This Standard serves as a framework that can be used by governments 
as the basis for developing their own guidelines, regulations, and 
funding models for safe listening, taking into consideration local 
conditions, culture, and legislative approach and reflecting the 
viewpoints of local stakeholders. The safe listening features outlined 
can also be voluntarily adopted and applied by venue operators, 
event organizers, and music-makers wishing to follow best practice 
and protect the hearing of their audiences. All stakeholders including 
regulatory bodies, venue owners, music-makers and civil society 
should be partners in this effort that aims to reduce the risk of hearing 
loss in the population. Further insights regarding implementation are 
addressed in the section: “Adoption and implementation of the WHO 
Global standard for safe listening venues and events”.
 
7

=== página 18 ===
Definitions of terms used in 
the safe listening features
Assumed protection value:
The attenuation in decibels (dB) expected to be achieved in a particular 
octave band by a particular make and model of personal hearing 
protection by at least 84% of individuals. 
Audience:
One or more audience members collectively.
Audience area:
All locations in a venue or at an event that could reasonably be expected 
to be occupied by an audience member.
Audience member:
A person attending a venue or event for recreational purposes.
A-weighting:
Frequency weighting function used to measure sound levels when 
the purpose is to assess the risk of hearing injury; emphasizes mid 
frequencies and mimics the sensitivity of human hearing to sounds at 
low-to-moderate sound pressure levels (SPL).
Backline:
Amplifiers and loudspeaker enclosures placed behind the band on 
stage; typically the musicians’ own equipment used to amplify electric 
guitars, bass guitars, or keyboards.
Bass shaker:
A tactile transducer that is typically attached to a drummer’s stool to 
allow them to monitor their kick/bass drum through low-frequency 
bodily transmitted vibration, negating the need for a subwoofer 
monitor loudspeaker/drum fill. 
Calibrator:
A compact device that generates a tone at a known frequency  
and sound pressure level (usually a 1000 Hz tone at either 94 dB SPL  
or 114 dB SPL) – the calibrator is placed over the microphone of the  
sound level measurement system to verify that sound levels are  
being measured accurately and to allow the sensitivity to be adjusted  
if necessary.
8

=== página 19 ===
Core audience area:
The primary area in a venue or at an event that would ordinarily be 
occupied by audience members actively listening to the music (e.g. the 
area in front of the stage or the main dancefloor); the core audience area 
extends from the front row to the rear of the area ordinarily occupied by 
audience members (or, for venues with a balcony, from the front row to 
the front edge of the balcony).
Correction: 
The value, or values (where frequency-band-specific correction is 
performed) to be added to the sound level measured at the long-term 
measurement position to estimate the corresponding sound level at 
the reference measurement position. 
C-weighting:
Frequency weighting function that weights frequencies relatively evenly 
across most of the audio bandwidth (20 Hz to 20 kHz); mimics the 
sensitivity of human hearing to sounds at high sound pressure levels.
Decibel (dB):
A relative unit used to measure the intensity of a sound by comparing  
it with a reference value on a logarithmic scale; many different types  
of acoustical measurement are expressed in decibels. 
Delay-fill:
One or more secondary loudspeakers used to support the delivery of 
sound to the rear of an audience area when the main loudspeakers 
are unable to adequately cover this area; the signal to the delay-
fill loudspeaker(s) is electronically or digitally delayed so that sound 
arrives in synchrony with, or slightly later than, sound from the main 
loudspeakers.
Drum-fill:
A side-fill monitor loudspeaker that is used to help a drummer hear  
the other musicians over the (typically very intense) acoustic sound  
of the drum kit.
Effective sound level limit:
A corrected sound level limit that accounts for a difference in sound 
level between the long-term measurement position and the reference 
measurement position.
Equal energy principle:
The assumption that the total effect of sound on hearing is proportional 
to the total amount of sound energy received by the ear, irrespective of 
the distribution of that energy over time. 
Definitions of terms used in the safe listening features
9

=== página 20 ===
Event:
An occasion on which an audience attends a venue or other site at 
which enjoyment of amplified music is a central purpose of attendance. 
Floor monitor:
A type of monitor loudspeaker with an angled back which, when 
positioned on the stage floor, allows sound to be projected upwards 
towards the performers’ ears; often referred to as a “monitor wedge”.
Front-fill:
One or more secondary loudspeakers, usually positioned on the front 
edge of the stage and used to support the delivery of sound to the front 
rows of the audience.
Front of house (FOH):
The location at a venue or event from which the sound engineer mixes 
a performance.
Hidden hearing loss (HHL): 
Neural degeneration in the inner ear that is not revealed by standard 
tests of hearing threshold sensitivity and yet which may cause 
difficulties in areas such as speech understanding in noise, tinnitus, and 
hyperacusis.
Hyperacusis:
An increased sensitivity to sound that makes everyday sounds 
seem much louder than they should, sometimes resulting in pain or 
discomfort. 
In-ear monitoring (IEM):
An alternative to the use of monitor loudspeakers in which each 
performer hears a personalized monitor mix through an insert earphone.
Limiter:
An electronic device that prevents the amplitude of a signal from 
exceeding a predetermined value by attenuating peaks above a certain 
threshold; used as a safety device to prevent a sound system from 
generating dangerously high peak sound levels.
Line array:
A loudspeaker system comprising several individual loudspeaker 
elements mounted in a (usually vertical) line; typically used as the 
main loudspeakers at mid-to-large-sized venues and events to help 
distribute sound uniformly across the audience area.
Long-term measurement position:
The position at a venue or event where the measurement microphone 
(a component of the sound level measurement system) is placed 
during ongoing monitoring of sound levels.
10
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 21 ===
Loudspeaker:
A component of the sound system that is responsible for converting an 
electrical signal into acoustic (sound) energy. 
Main loudspeakers:
The loudspeaker(s) responsible for delivering broadband sound to a 
majority of the audience. 
Monitor engineer:
A sound engineer whose focus is on operating the monitoring system 
that allows performers to hear themselves and one another clearly on 
stage.
Monitor loudspeaker:
A loudspeaker positioned on stage and facing the performer(s) to allow 
them to hear their own performance.
Monitor wedge:
Synonymous with floor monitor.
Noise-induced hearing loss:
Hearing loss occurring due to exposure to high sound levels. Such 
exposure may take place in recreational environments or occupational 
settings. The term encompasses music-induced and general sound-
induced hearing loss.
Out-fill:
One or more secondary loudspeakers, used to support the delivery 
of sound to the outer edges of the audience area when the main 
loudspeakers cannot adequately cover these areas.
Patron:
Synonymous with audience member.
Peak sound level
The peak instantaneous C-weighted sound level without any time 
weighting or averaging (LCpeak); a measure of the highest sound levels 
that occur during sudden transients in the music.
Personal hearing protection:
Devices such as earplugs worn by an individual to reduce their personal 
sound exposure. 
Point-source loudspeaker:
A single loudspeaker unit (usually containing multiple drivers to handle 
different parts of the frequency spectrum) that radiates sound in an 
approximately spherical pattern; typical of the type of public-address 
loudspeaker commonly used at smaller venues and events. 
Definitions of terms used in the safe listening features
11

=== página 22 ===
Public address (PA) system:
Synonymous with sound system.
Quiet zone: 
An area at a venue or event in which sound levels are purposefully kept 
lower—i.e. a place where audience members can rest their ears.
Reference measurement position:
A pre-identified position at a venue or event, at which compliance  
with the sound level limit is to be assessed.
Responsible party:
The person or organization having ultimate responsibility for ensuring 
that safe listening features are adequately implemented and that the 
sound level limit is not exceeded at a venue or event.
Responsible actor:
A person having the authority and means to adjust the sound level  
at a venue or event.
Reverberation:
The multitude of reflections that occur as sound repeatedly bounces off 
the surfaces of a room, causing sounds to persist for up to a few seconds 
after the sound has ceased at its source.
Reverberation time (RT60):
A property of a room describing the time it takes for sound energy 
to decay by a set amount (60 dB); sometimes RT60 is measured by 
timing the decay over a smaller range and multiplying that time by an 
appropriate factor (e.g. measuring the time taken for the energy  
to decay by 30 dB, and multiplying by a factor of 2, gives a measure 
known as T30).
Room mode:
One of several low-frequency resonances that exists within a room when 
it is excited by a sound source. This results from coherent interference 
between wavefronts bouncing back and forth between a room’s 
surfaces and can give rise to an uneven bass response in smaller venues.
Safe listening event:
An event that adopts and promotes safe listening practices by 
implementing the features described in this Standard.
Safe listening policy:
A written policy prepared by or on behalf of the responsible party 
setting out the measures to be taken to ensure safe listening conditions 
at a venue or event.
12
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 23 ===
Safe listening venue:
A venue that adopts and promotes safe listening practices by 
implementing the features described in this Standard.
Side-fill:
A type of monitor loudspeaker that sits upright on the side of the stage 
and is used to deliver sound to performers who are not within range of a 
floor monitor.
Sound absorber:
An object, material, or surface finish that provides sound absorption.
Sound absorption:
The removal of sound energy from the air as sound impinges on an 
object or surface and is partially dissipated through an imperceptible 
increase in heat.
Sound diffuser:
An object, material, or surface finish that provides sound diffusion.
Sound diffusion:
The spreading of sound energy in many directions as sound reflects off a 
convex or irregular surface.
Sound dose:
A measure of cumulative sound exposure, often expressed as a 
percentage of a reference exposure.
Sound engineer:
The person responsible for manipulating the sound delivered through 
the sound system to achieve a mix perceived as balanced and enjoyable 
by the audience – often, though not necessarily, also the responsible 
actor. 
Sound exposure:
The cumulative sound energy that an audience member receives over 
the course of one or more visits to a venue or event.
Sound level:
The A-weighted equivalent continuous (time-averaged) sound level 
measured with an averaging time interval of 15 minutes (LAeq, 15 min).
Sound levels:
A term used to describe sound pressure levels in general without 
implying any specific frequency weighting or time-integration window.
Sound level limit:
A sound level that is not to be exceeded at the reference measurement 
position.
Definitions of terms used in the safe listening features
13

=== página 24 ===
Sound level measurement system:
The combination of a measurement microphone, a measuring 
instrument, and a visual display installed at a venue or event for the 
purposes of monitoring the sound level.
Sound quality:
The overall subjective impression of the quality (e.g. clarity, transparency, 
naturalness, impact, punchiness, fullness, fidelity, dynamics) of the 
sound heard by the audience.
Sound system:
The full set of electronic equipment responsible for reproducing or 
reinforcing amplified music at a venue or event, typically comprising 
microphones, a mixing desk, signal processors, amplifiers, and 
loudspeakers.
Subwoofer:
A loudspeaker dedicated to reproducing only low-frequency (bass) 
sound below around 100 Hz.
Test signal:
A reproducible digital or electronic signal played through the sound 
system to determine the required correction between the long-term 
measurement position and the reference measurement position.
Tinnitus:
The perception of noises in the head and/or ear which have no external 
source – often perceived as “ringing in the ears” after exposure to high 
sound levels.
Venue:
An indoor or outdoor location that is regularly attended by an audience 
where enjoyment of amplified music is a central purpose of attendance.
14
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 25 ===
Feature 1:  
Sound level limit
Sound level below 100 dB LAeq, 15 min
1

=== página 26 ===
F1.1 	 Key elements
F1.1.1	
A key aspect of protecting the hearing of audience members  
at venues and events is to maintain control over the sound level.  
Feature 1 specifies an upper limit for the sound level that seeks  
to balance the need to protect hearing, on the one hand, against  
audience expectations and freedom of artistic expression on the other. 
F1.1.2 	 The recommended sound level limit is 100 dB LAeq, 15min,  
assessed at the reference measurement position (see Annex 5).
F1.1.3 	 The sound level limit is specified as an equivalent continuous 
sound level (also known as a time-averaged sound level), Leq,  
expressed in decibels.4 
4	 International Acoustics Commission, 2013. IEC 61672-1:2013.  
See: https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/5708.
Feature 1:  
Sound level limit
Sound level below 100 dB LAeq, 15 min
	Feature 1 specifies an upper limit for the sound level at venues  
and events.
	Keeping the sound level below the limit makes for a safer and  
more enjoyable experience for the audience.
	The sound level limit applies at a defined reference 
measurement position within each venue or event.
	The limit is an upper limit, not a desired target; a sound level 
significantly below the limit would be suitable for many venues  
and events.
	A reduced limit should be implemented for events targeted  
at children.
	It is important to identify, for each venue or event, who has 
responsibility for ensuring that the sound level is kept below  
the limit.
	Grassroots venues may need significant support to be able to 
comply with the limit.
16
100dB

=== página 27 ===
This type of measurement is well-suited for use in recreational venues, 
where sound levels fluctuate over time. The equivalent continuous 
sound level is the constant sound level which, over a given period,  
would have the same total energy as the fluctuating sound level.
F1.1.4 	 The sound level limit is specified as an A-weighted equivalent 
continuous sound level, LAeq. A-weighting is a frequency weighting 
commonly used when assessing the risk of sound-induced hearing 
injury. It approximates the sensitivity of human hearing to sounds  
of different frequencies. The rationale for its use is summarized  
in Annex 3. 
F1.1.5	
The sound level limit is  
specified with an averaging time interval  
of 15 minutes, LAeq, 15min. 
The sound level reported at any given 
moment is influenced by what has happened 
during the preceding 15 minutes. It is a 
moving-average measurement, meaning 
that the sound level is continuously updated, 
rather than being measured in discrete 
15-minute periods.
The use of a 15-minute averaging time 
interval is consistent with the preferences of 
practicing live sound engineers and offers 
advantages over shorter (e.g. 1 minute) or 
longer (e.g. 60 minute) intervals (29, 30).  
A 15-minute interval is long enough to allow the natural dynamics  
(the highs and lows in intensity) of a musical performance to be 
preserved, while being short enough to provide sound engineers with 
the timely information they need to control the sound level effectively 
(see Annex 2). 
F1.1.6 	 The sound level limit of 100 dB LAeq, 15min is intended to reduce  
the exposure of audiences to unnecessarily hazardous sound levels, and, 
with that, the global incidence of recreational sound-induced hearing 
loss. It is derived from the evidence-based limits recommended in 
WHO’s Noise Guidelines for the European Region (23) (see Annex 2 for 
further information).
It is important to note that the 100 dB LAeq, 15min sound level limit does 
not, and cannot, eliminate all risk of an individual audience member 
suffering sound-induced hearing injury, especially if he or she is a 
frequent attendee at music venues or events.
It is important  
to note that the  
100 dB LAeq, 15min sound 
level limit does not, 
and cannot, eliminate 
all risk of an individual 
audience member 
suffering sound-induced 
hearing injury, especially 
if he or she is a frequent 
attendee at music 
venues or events.
Feature 1: Sound level limit
17

=== página 28 ===
F1.2	 Applicability
F1.2.1 	 The sound level limit applies at the reference measurement 
position, which refers to a pre-identified position specific to each  
venue or event (see Annex 5).
F1.2.2 	The sound level limit applies whenever 
the audience is present  
at a venue or event. This means that the 
15-minute time-averaged sound level, 
measured on a moving-average basis, should 
at no time exceed 100 dB LAeq, 15min while the 
audience is present.
F1.3 	 Peak sound levels
F1.3.1 	 The sound level limit of  
100 dB LAeq, 15min may seem low when compared 
to reports in the media of sound levels at 
rock concerts that reach 125 dB and beyond. 
However, it is important to recognize that 
acousticians use many different types of 
measurement to characterize sound levels, 
and while they are all expressed in decibels, 
they are not equivalent and cannot be directly 
compared. A concert mixed to comply with the 100 dB LAeq, 15min limit 
may still contain momentary sound levels (quantified as  
LAFmax or LCpeak) that routinely exceed 100 dB (see Annex 3 for  
further explanation).
F1.3.2 	Momentary sounds that are sufficiently intense, such as can be 
generated by pyrotechnics, cannons, or powerful sound systems, can 
cause immediate and lasting mechanical damage to the ear. This is 
distinct from the gradually developing sound-induced hearing loss that 
results from sustained and repeated exposure to high average sound 
levels. Although it is clear that intense peaks can cause acute hearing 
damage, there is no agreement on a safe level (23). While research is 
ongoing, existing evidence-based guidelines can be applied, such  
as a 140 dB LCpeak (peak instantaneous sound pressure level with 
C-weighting) limit, to protect against immediate hearing injury (31). 
F1.3.3 	In cases where the sound system is capable, in principle, of 
producing peak levels above 140 dB LCpeak, the output should be 
controlled by a fast-acting electronic limiter to prevent such levels 
occurring at any location ordinarily occupied by an audience member. 
The purpose of the limiter is not to shut down or silence the music if the 
sound level becomes too high: its purpose is to protect against sudden 
Depending on 
how the reference 
measurement 
position is determined, 
audience members 
standing or seated  
close to the 
loudspeakers or stage 
may experience higher 
sound levels. Audience 
members standing or 
seated well away from 
the loudspeakers/stage 
may experience  
lower sound levels.
18
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 29 ===
extreme peaks by capping the level at which the sound system will 
reproduce them (see Annex 3).
F1.4 	 Roles and responsibilities
F1.4.1 	 The effective control of sound levels at venues and events 
requires a common will and cooperation among multiple stakeholders 
– from musicians and sound engineers, to venue operators and event 
organizers.
Nevertheless, it is important that for each venue or event, a responsible 
party is identified that has ultimate responsibility for ensuring that safe 
listening features are adequately implemented. The responsible party 
would ordinarily be the person or organization that is legally responsible 
for the event, such as the venue owner or event organizer. 
F1.4.2 	The responsible party should develop a written safe listening 
policy that sets out the measures to be taken to ensure safe listening 
conditions, including clarification of individual roles and responsibilities 
and any advice or standard operating procedures that are to be 
followed.
F1.4.3 	Where there is a requirement for third parties – for example, 
performers, sound engineers, or talent bookers – to play a role in 
achieving safe listening conditions, these requirements should be 
codified in a formal contractual relationship.
F1.4.4 	For each venue or event, the responsible party should ensure 
that a responsible actor is appointed to periodically monitor the sound 
level (see Feature 2: Monitoring of the sound level) and to make any 
adjustments needed to keep the sound level below the sound level limit.
F1.4.5 	The role of the responsible actor may be enacted by an 
automated system having the ability to receive and interpret sound  
level measurement data and make suitable adjustments to ensure  
that the sound level limit is not exceeded. 
The operation of such a system would differ from a conventional 
electronic limiter in that it would generally be required to make only 
gradual (and, ideally, perceptually transparent) adjustments to the 
output level of the sound system. 
Feature 1: Sound level limit
19

=== página 30 ===
F1.5 	 Considerations
F1.5.1 	 Complying with the sound level limit may pose a serious 
challenge in some venues, especially small live-music venues (see 
Box 3). Even when all reasonably practicable measures have been 
taken, exceedance of the sound level limit may still occur, with these 
occurrences being outside the control of the responsible actor. 
Governments and local authorities are strongly encouraged to take 
such limitations into consideration when developing legislation or 
enforcement protocols based on this Standard.
F1.5.2 	It is common to see the sound level at concerts and club nights 
increase steadily throughout the evening, sometimes by as much as 
10–15 dB LAeq (32, 33).
Such increases are not always deliberate, and in some cases result 
from a gradual turning up of the sound system to compensate for ever-
increasing ear fatigue experienced by the person responsible for setting 
the output level.
When a gradual increase in sound level is desired, for example as an 
event moves towards its climax, it is advisable that the sound level starts 
out sufficiently low in the early part of the event to leave room for it to 
rise later, while remaining below the sound level limit. In some cases it 
may be necessary for venue operators or event organizers to impose a 
contractual obligation on supporting acts (and/or their sound engineer) 
to keep to a lower limit, to ensure that the headline act can play “louder” 
while still complying with the 100 dB LAeq, 15min sound level limit.
F1.5.3 	A reduced sound level limit should be implemented for venues 
or events specifically targeted at children. The still-developing auditory 
system in children may be more vulnerable to sound-induced injury 
than the fully developed auditory system in adults, and children are less 
likely to be able to make free and informed decisions about their sound 
exposure (34). 
There is no clear evidence for precisely how much lower the limit should 
be for venues or events specifically targeted at children. However, based 
on international precedent (25, 26), where an event is expected to attract 
a majority audience of children, the sound level limit should be reduced 
at least to 94 dB LAeq, 15min, with 90 dB LAeq, 15min or lower recommended  
for events targeted at young children. Peak sound levels at venues or 
events targeted specifically at children should be limited to not exceed 
120 dB LCpeak (31) (see Annex 3).
20
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 31 ===
Box 3: 
The challenge of controlling the sound level in 
small live-music venues 
In bars, clubs, or other venues which only play prerecorded 
music, the sound level can be controlled by simply setting the 
sound system to an appropriate output level. The situation is 
more complex in live-music venues. Sound levels can change 
unpredictably from one moment to the next during a live 
performance, and, especially in small indoor venues, sound from 
loud on-stage sources (such as drum kits, electric guitar amplifiers, 
and monitor loudspeakers) can cause the sound level limit to 
be exceeded, independently of sound coming from the main 
loudspeakers. Unless adequate steps have been taken in advance, 
the sound engineer may be powerless to reduce the sound level 
while a performance is underway.
Long-term monitoring of sound levels at more than 600 concerts 
taking place across 50 venues in Norway revealed that sound levels 
at the FOH mixing desk exceeded 100 dB LAeq, 15min at around one-
third of all concerts (35). Levels above 100 dB LAeq, 15min occurred  
more often in smaller venues (ceiling height < 4 m/audience 
capacity < 350) than in larger venues. This is consistent with reports 
from other countries indicating that, while professional sound 
engineers often voluntarily mix shows at or below 100 dB LAeq, 15min  
in larger venues (36), sound levels in small to medium-sized live-
music venues frequently exceed 100 dB LAeq, 15min (37).
Highest sound level – LAeq, 15 min (dB) – recorded during each concert
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
85
90
95
100
105
110
Number of concerts
Levels above 100 dB
occur more often in
small venues (ceiling
height < 4 metres)
Adapted image courtesy of Morten Andreas Edvardsen from his thesis: Analysis 
measurements from Norwegian venues for amplified music, Norwegian University 
of Science and Technology.
Feature 1: Sound level limit
21

=== página 32 ===
Box 3: 
The challenge of controlling the sound level in 
small live-music venues (continued) 
Research conducted for the Flemish government confirms that, in 
small live-music venues, the overall sound level is typically dictated 
by the level of the loudest on-stage source, most often an acoustic 
drum kit.
A case study conducted in a typical small venue found the sound 
level in the middle of the venue to be 99.5 dB LAeq, ~3min when 
the drummer played the drum part to a song, solo, and without 
amplification. When the drums were minimally amplified to create 
a suitable reinforced drum sound for rock music, the sound level 
increased to 103.4 dB LAeq, ~3min. Adding in the remainder of the  
band (guitars, bass, and vocals) resulted in a further increase  
to 107.5 dB LAeq, ~3min.
 
 
In circumstances such as these, the sound engineer has extremely 
limited scope to “turn down the volume”: the sound level emanating 
from an acoustic drum kit cannot be altered while a performance is 
underway, and to reduce the output from the main sound system 
risks rendering vocals and other instruments inaudible beneath the 
sound coming directly from the drums. 
Insight into the scale of the measures that may be needed in a small 
live-music venue* comes from a case study conducted at a Swedish 
venue (38). 
*	 Feature 3 provides further information about the optimization of venue 
acoustics and sound systems for safe listening.
Image courtesy of Marcel Kok,  
dBControl.
Drums alone 
(unamplified) 
99.5 dB dB LAeq. ~3 minutes
Drums alone 
(with sound reinforcement) 
103.4 dB dB LAeq. ~3 minutes
Full band 
(with sound reinforcement) 
107.5 dB dB LAeq. ~3 minutes
+4.1dB
+3.9dB
22
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 33 ===
Box 3: 
The challenge of controlling the sound level in 
small live-music venues (continued) 
A 9 dB reduction in the average sound level during concerts  
(which was necessary to bring sound levels in line with a 
government-recommended limit of 100 dB LAeq) was achieved by:
•	 Installing a new suspended ceiling system 
•	 Installing sound-absorbing wall panels
•	 Installing a new sound system 
•	 Reconfiguring the stage
•	 Relocating the bar outside of the main performance space
•	 Providing the venue’s in-house technician with comprehensive 
training about safe listening
While not all of the above measures are required in all venues,  
it is clear that the measures needed to keep sound levels below  
100 dB LAeq, 15min in small, indoor live-music venues can be costly and 
may require significant expertise. Despite playing a vital economic 
and cultural role in towns and cities, most grassroots live-music 
venues operate on extremely tight margins, if not at a loss, and 
many are unable to self-fund the necessary improvements (39). 
Governments and local authorities are encouraged to find 
ways to support venues to deliver safer listening conditions for 
their audiences (see section following Features: Adoption and 
implementation of the WHO Global standard for safe listening 
venues and events for details of a publicly funded scheme that 
supports Norwegian venues to make improvements to acoustics 
and sound systems).
Feature 1: Sound level limit
23

=== página 34 ===
24
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS
Feature 2:  
Monitoring  
the sound level
The sound level has to be actively monitored to ensure 
compliance with the limit of 100 dB LAeq, 15 min
2

=== página 35 ===
F2.1 	 Key elements
F2.1.1 	 The effective control of sound levels at venues and events 
requires that the sound level be measured accurately and that the 
results be made visible to the responsible actor in real time, so that he or 
she can enact any changes required to keep the sound level below the 
sound level limit (40).
F2.1.2 	 A sound level measurement system should be used to actively 
monitor the sound level throughout the duration of each performance 
or event. Where the sound level can be assumed to be reasonably static, 
for example, when prerecorded music is played through a sound system 
in a bar or club, it may be sufficient to check the sound level only when 
an adjustment is made to the output level of the sound system. During 
a live performance, where the sound level can change more quickly  
and unpredictably, closer monitoring of the sound level will usually  
be required. 
F2.1.3 	Where the measurement equipment allows, tamperproof, date- 
and time-stamped digital logs should be maintained of the sound levels 
measured throughout the period during which a venue or event was 
open to an audience.
Feature 2: Monitoring  
of the sound level
The sound level has to be actively monitored to ensure 
compliance with the limit of 100 dB LAeq, 15 min
	Feature 2 describes how sound levels should be monitored at 
venues and events.
	Requirements for accuracy and calibration of measurement 
equipment and record keeping are explained.
	Procedures are given for applying a correction where the 
sound level cannot be directly measured at the reference 
measurement position.
dB
25

=== página 36 ===
Where possible, these logs should be 
augmented with information to help inform 
future research, including frequency spectra 
of the measured sound levels in octave-band 
or one-third-octave-band resolution, the type 
of event, primary musical genre, approximate 
audience size, and any other relevant 
information (for example, if a touring act used 
their own sound system, instead of the house 
system). 
F2.1.4 	The requirement to actively monitor 
the sound level may be waived in cases where it can be demonstrated 
that the installed sound system is not capable of, or is limited by 
electronic means from, producing a sound pressure level (LAeq, 15min) at the 
reference measurement position that exceeds the sound level limit. 
Where the output of the sound system is limited by electronic means, 
users should not be able to alter or override this functionality before or 
during an event.
In such cases the sound system should be periodically checked by a 
suitably qualified person to confirm that it is operating within its design 
specifications and that any sound-limiting features remain effective.
Note: Optional limiting to ensure compliance with the 100 dB LAeq, 15min 
sound level limit at the reference measurement position is separate  
from and supplemental to any limiting required to control peak sound 
levels (see Annex 3).
F2.2 	 Measurement equipment and procedure
F2.2.1 	The sound level measurement system should function as an 
integrating-averaging sound level meter, capable of measuring and 
displaying LAeq, 15min numerically in decibels (41). The sound level should 
be measured on a moving-average basis, with the display updated at 
periodic intervals (e.g. once every second) to show the current value  
of LAeq, 15min. 
F2.2.2 	The numerical display may be supplemented by other visual 
indicators of sound level, for example, a traffic-light style display or 
graphical meter designed to indicate how the current sound level 
compares to the sound level limit. To prevent sound levels being set 
higher than they need to be, careful consideration should be given 
to the design of such displays to ensure that they do not bias the 
responsible actor towards treating the sound level limit as a “preferred” 
sound level to be aimed for (72).
A sound level 
measurement system 
should be used to 
actively monitor the 
sound level throughout 
the duration of each 
performance or event.
26
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 37 ===
F2.2.3 	The measured sound level should be clearly visible to the 
responsible actor from the position at which he or she is able to adjust 
the sound level (for example, from the FOH mixing desk or place where 
the output level of the sound system is set). 
F2.2.4 	The measured sound level should not, in general, be displayed 
to the audience. This is to avoid a phenomenon observed, for example, 
at some sporting events, where the crowd engages in a competition to 
register as high a sound level as possible. 
F2.2.5 	The accuracy of a sound level meter is indicated by its “class”, as 
defined in international standard IEC 61672-1:2013 (41). A class 1 sound 
level meter is more accurate, although generally also more costly, than a 
class 2 sound level meter.
The sound level measurement system should meet, as a minimum, 
the main performance requirements for a class 2 device at frequencies 
between 63 Hz and 8 kHz inclusive, as assessed based on the periodic 
tests as defined in IEC 61672-3:2013 (42). 
By focusing on the main performance requirements for a class 2 sound 
level meter, as opposed to the full suite of acoustical and electrical 
requirements that must be met for a device to be considered fully class 
2 compliant, it becomes possible to use a wider range of measurement 
hardware, some of which is likely to be more accessible, especially in 
low-income countries (see Box 4).
Box 4: 
Different forms of sound level  
measurement system
Sound level measurement systems come in different forms.  
Below are some examples of common forms.
Self-contained sound level meter
This is the traditional form of most class 1 and 
class 2 compliant sound level meters by IEC 
standards (40).
The device can be hand-held or mounted on  
a tripod.
It is usually possible to purchase a special-
purpose extension cable if the measurement 
microphone needs to be mounted in a different 
location from the main body of  
the device. 
Image courtesy  
of Marcel Kok,  
dBControl.
Feature 2: Monitoring the sound level
27

=== página 38 ===
Box 4: 
Different forms of sound level  
measurement system (continued)
Computer-based system
These systems combine a software application 
running on a laptop or tablet with a calibrated 
external measurement microphone*, often 
connected by USB.
Some manufacturers offer plug-and-play solutions 
for live-sound level monitoring, in which all the 
required software and hardware is provided  
as a package. 
An advantage of such integrated solutions is that 
the software usually includes dedicated features 
designed to make it easier for the sound engineer 
to comply with a given sound level limit, and 
automatic logging of measurement results to a cloud-based service 
is possible. Some systems may have undergone testing to verify 
compliance with the requirements of a class 1 or class 2 sound level 
meter (41).
Smartphone app with  
external measurement microphone
Smartphones are designed to function 
primarily as communication devices, not as 
precision measuring instruments. The built-in 
microphones are not suitable for accurately 
measuring sound levels. 
However, when a well-developed and validated 
app† is used in conjunction with a high-quality 
external measurement microphone, some 
smartphones may form the basis of a system 
that meets the key performance requirements 
for a class 2 sound level meter (43).
Since smartphone hardware, operating systems, 
and apps undergo rapid development, it is strongly advised only to 
use a hardware and app combination that has been formally tested  
to verify compliance with the requirements of IEC standards. 
* 	 Note that purchasing a “class 2 compliant” microphone does not automatically 
mean that the sound level measurement system will meet the class 2 
performance requirements: the requirements apply to the system as a whole, 
including all hardware, software, and interconnecting components.
† 	 The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) Sound Level 
Meter (SLM) app is validated and free-of-charge (available at https://www.cdc.
gov/niosh/topics/noise/app.html). 
Image courtesy  
of Marcel Kok, 
dBControl.
Image courtesy  
of NIOSH.
28
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 39 ===
F2.2.6 	
The measurement microphone 
should have an omnidirectional polar pattern 
(meaning that it captures sound evenly from 
all directions); it can be of either free-field or 
diffuse-field (random incidence) type. 
Where a free-field microphone is used, it 
should be pointed towards the dominant 
source of sound (typically the main loudspeakers/stage). 
Where a diffuse-field microphone is used, it should not be pointed 
directly towards any sound source, but rather upwards towards the 
ceiling or downwards towards the floor (if suspended from the ceiling).
F2.2.7 	The use of a windscreen around the measurement microphone 
is advised, both to reduce the influence of wind noise when measuring 
outdoors and to provide added protection from dust and shocks 
indoors. 
Note: On some sound level meters, it is necessary to change a setting in 
the setup menu to indicate that a windscreen is in use.
F2.2.8 	Regular calibration is important to ensure the accuracy of 
sound level measurements (see Annex 4 for further information on the 
importance of calibration). 
The calibration of the sound level measurement system (including any 
extension cables, adaptors, and display devices) should be periodically 
checked using a class 1 or class 2 acoustic field calibrator (44), as 
appropriate to the class of measurement system in use. 
F2.3 	 Measurement position and the use  
of a correction 
F2.3.1 	The measurement microphone should be positioned  
(as far as is practicable):
i)		
at or close to the reference measurement position, where the 
sound level limit applies (see Annex 5);
ii)	
at a height comparable to audience head height;
iii)	
out of reach of audience members;
iv)	
at least 1 metre from any large reflective surface (such as a wall, 
ceiling, or large piece of furniture or equipment); and
v)	
with a clear line of sight to the main loudspeakers. 
Regular calibration is 
important to ensure the 
accuracy of sound level 
measurements.
Feature 2: Monitoring the sound level
29

=== página 40 ===
F2.3.2 	Where it is not possible to position the microphone as described 
above, because no such location is available, or because this would not 
offer a safe and secure place to mount the microphone while an event 
is underway, the microphone should instead be positioned at a more 
convenient long-term measurement position. This could be, for example, 
directly in front of the main loudspeakers, suspended from the ceiling 
over the audience area, or at the FOH mixing desk. 
F2.3.3 	Where the long-term measurement position is different from  
the reference measurement position, a correction will usually be 
required so that the measurements reflect the sound level at the 
reference measurement position. Such correction may not be needed 
where certain conditions are met (45) (see Annex 5 and Annex 6).
F2.3.4 	When a correction is to be applied, it should be applied 
automatically so that the measurements reflect the sound level at 
the reference measurement position. Where this is not possible, an 
alternative is to adjust the sound level limit by an amount equal to the 
correction (see Annex 5 and Annex 6).
The correction should be remeasured following any material change to 
the layout of the venue, upgrade or modification of the sound system,  
or change to the sound level measurement system (including a change 
of long-term measurement position).
30
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 41 ===
Feature 3:  
Venue acoustics and 
sound-system design
Venue acoustics and sound systems should be optimized 
for safe listening, so far as is reasonably practicable 
3

=== página 42 ===
F3.1 	 Key elements
F3.1.1 	 Suitable venue acoustics and appropriate sound-system design 
are critical to the delivery of a safe and high-quality listening experience 
for all audience members. Particularly in smaller indoor venues that  
host live-music performances, these elements can dictate whether  
it is possible to comply with the sound level limit (see Box 3 for  
further information). 
F3.1.2 	 Good sound quality and safe listening go together, so optimizing 
the venue acoustics and sound system to support safe listening can be 
expected to also improve sound quality and promote greater audience 
satisfaction.
Feature 3: Venue 
acoustics and sound-
system design
Venue acoustics and sound systems should be optimized 
for safe listening, so far as is reasonably practicable 
	Feature 3 ensures that the acoustics of a venue and the design  
of the sound system support safe listening. 
	Optimizing the acoustics and sound system for safe listening 
improves sound quality and enhances the listening experience  
for audience members and performers. 
	High-level design goals for venue acoustics and sound systems  
are discussed, along with general tips and advice on how these 
goals can be achieved. 
	Sound levels increase rapidly immediately in front of 
loudspeakers, so audience members should be prevented from 
approaching the loudspeakers whenever possible. 
	Effective management of on-stage sound levels is crucial to 
achieving safe listening conditions in small live-music venues.
32

=== página 43 ===
F3.1.3 	 Venue owners/operators should be supported and encouraged 
to take all reasonably practicable measures to optimize the acoustics 
and sound system for safe listening. While some measures are relatively 
easy and affordable to implement, many venues face significant 
financial barriers to making the necessary improvements, as well as 
possible constraints relating to architectural, structural, accessibility, 
safety, planning, and contractual issues.  
 
Box 8 presents a case study from Norway, where a publicly funded 
scheme exists to support venues to make improvements. 
F3.1.4 	Safe and enjoyable listening experiences happen (46):
i)		
when the venue acoustics are well-suited to amplified music;
ii)	
when the sound system is well-designed and of good quality; and
iii)	
in the case of live events, when the performers and sound 
engineer(s) cooperate to manage on-stage sound levels and 
deliver high-quality sound to the audience.
These three aspects are considered in the rest of this section.
F3.2 	 Venue acoustics
F3.2.1 	 Poor or unsuitable acoustics in an indoor venue can impact on 
sound levels in two main ways:
i)		
If a venue is excessively reverberant (too much sound being 
reflected from the floor, walls, and ceiling), sound from all sources 
is amplified, increasing the overall sound level. The sound 
engineer may need to increase the output from the sound  
system to hazardous levels to overcome sound coming  
directly from the stage and/or the audience.
ii)	
An overly reverberant venue, or a venue with other acoustical 
problems (such as prominent echoes or an unbalanced frequency 
response), makes it difficult for the sound engineer to achieve  
a clear and controlled mix. Sound levels can gradually increase  
as the sound engineer strives to improve the clarity of the  
mix (29, 35, 47).
F3.2.2 	Amplified music generally sounds best in venues with well-
damped room reverberation, i.e. a “dry” acoustic character. Suitable 
reverberation times for amplified-music venues (based on Norwegian 
regulations) (48) are provided in Annex 7.
F3.2.3 	In most venues, and especially those that feature predominantly 
hard, reflective surfaces (e.g. brick, concrete, plaster, or glass), it is 
necessary to introduce additional sound absorption to control room 
reverberation (see Annex 7 for examples of materials for acoustic 
treatment of a venue).
Feature 3: Venue acoustics and sound-system design
33

=== página 44 ===
Although, in most cases, excessive 
reverberation is the problem, the aim should 
not be to absorb all reverberant sound, 
as an acoustically “dead” venue makes it 
harder for musicians to play together as 
an ensemble and can result in a feeling of 
disconnectedness from the audience. 
A trained acoustician is able to evaluate the 
acoustics of an existing or proposed venue 
and advise on the nature and extent of any 
acoustic treatment needed.5
F3.2.4 	Mid- and high-frequency sound can be absorbed through the 
introduction of soft, porous materials. Examples include upholstered 
seating, carpets, curtains, and drapes. A suspended sound-absorbing 
ceiling can be particularly effective, in part because of the large surface 
area available for treatment. High-performance sound-absorbing panels 
are also available, typically made of open-cell foam or a fabric-wrapped 
fibrous material, such as mineral wool. These can be mounted to the 
walls or ceiling.
F3.2.5 	Absorbing low-frequency sound is generally more challenging, 
but can significantly improve sound quality. Through better control 
of low-frequency reverberation, the sound engineer can more easily 
achieve a clear and impactful mix while also complying with the sound 
level limit. This commonly relies on use of resonant absorbers (examples 
are provided in Annex 7). 
F3.2.6 	To be effective, sound absorption should generally be distributed 
across a venue’s surfaces, rather than concentrated in a single area. 
In some cases, however, it may be beneficial to place particular types 
of acoustic treatment in specific locations, in order to bring about a 
desired effect. Where trained acousticians are available, venue owners/
managers are encouraged to seek advice on such matters.
F3.2.7 	Strong reflections (e.g. from the rear wall of a venue) and sound-
focusing effects (e.g. due to a domed or arched construction) can 
seriously affect sound quality, and consequently also the ability of a 
sound engineer to achieve a clear and impactful mix at a safe sound 
level. Acoustical problems such as these can be addressed by treating 
the surface(s) giving rise to the reflection or sound-focusing effect in 
an appropriate way. The required treatment usually takes the form of 
either sound absorption (to reduce the amount of sound that reflects 
off the surface) or sound diffusion (to scatter sound off the surface in all 
directions, rather than reflecting it back in a single direction).
Amplified music 
generally sounds 
best in venues with 
well-damped room 
reverberation, i.e. a 
“dry” acoustic character.
5	 REW (www.roomeqwizard.com/) is a popular free software package capable of 
performing reverberation time measurements. It may be a helpful resource for 
venues that do not have access to the services of a trained acoustician.
34
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 45 ===
Note: Sound diffusion can be provided by a curved (convex) surface 
or by a surface with a varying depth profile (e.g. a series of “wells” of 
different depths). A surface that comprises a patchwork arrangement of 
absorbing and reflecting areas also provides a degree of sound diffusion 
(see Annex 7 for examples).
F3.3 	 Room modes
F3.3.1 	 Room modes (46) are low-frequency resonances that result  
from sound waves bouncing back and forth between a room’s surfaces 
(see Annex 8 for further details). Room modes can be problematic  
in small venues, such as cafés and bars, with a volume less than  
around 1000 m3. If the low-frequency (bass) response seems very 
uneven or “boomy” when moving around a small venue, this could 
indicate an issue with room modes.6 
F3.3.2 	The solution to room-mode issues is generally to introduce more 
low-frequency sound absorption (see Annex 7), focusing especially on 
treating the room corners and/or boundaries where two of the room’s 
surfaces meet (49). 
F3.4 	 Acoustics of the stage area
F3.4.1 	The acoustics of the stage area require special attention, 
especially in small indoor venues. There are two primary considerations:
i)		
The stage must provide a comfortable environment for musicians 
to perform, the most important factor being that they can hear 
themselves and one another clearly without needing to resort to 
excessive output level from stage monitors;
ii)	
Spillage of sound from the stage towards the audience should be 
adequately controlled. On-stage sound levels can be very high 
and are generally not under the control of the sound engineer.
F3.4.2 	In general, the acoustics of the stage area should be similar 
to those of the entire venue. This means that reverberation should 
ideally be controlled through a balanced combination of low-frequency 
resonant absorbers (which may be located around the stage perimeter) 
and mid-to-high-frequency porous absorption (often in the form of 
curtains, drapes, or other “stage textiles”). Any hard surfaces should be 
of a sound diffusing design to help spread sound uniformly across the 
stage and avoid problematic reflections.
6	 An uneven bass response can also indicate an issue with coherent interference 
between direct and/or reflected sound from one or more loudspeakers 
reproducing low-frequency sound (see Annex 8).
Feature 3: Venue acoustics and sound-system design
35

=== página 46 ===
F3.4.3 	In combination with other measures (see Annex 11), sound 
absorption on the rear wall of the stage area (behind where a drummer 
would ordinarily sit) can play an important role in reducing the level of 
stage sound that propagates towards the audience area in small indoor 
venues.
F3.5 	 Acoustics of outdoor venues
F3.5.1 	 The acoustics of outdoor venues are generally much simpler to 
manage than for indoor venues. The principal acoustical design issue is 
to avoid a situation where large objects such as site hoardings, buses, or 
the stage canopy, reflect or focus sound directly back towards the stage 
or audience area. In addition, care should be taken to ensure that there 
are no strong reflections from hard surfaces around the stage area that 
could interfere with the musicians’ ability to hear themselves clearly.
F3.6 	 Sound-system design
F3.6.1 	 A primary goal of sound-system design should be to achieve 
reasonably uniform sound distribution across the audience area,  
both in terms of overall sound pressure level and, especially, spectral 
balance between low and high frequencies; all audience members  
can then experience high-quality sound at a safe and enjoyable level. 
The positioning of loudspeakers is particularly important to achieve this. 
Scenarios illustrating the positioning of loudspeakers and the impact  
on sound distribution are presented in Annex 9. 
F3.6.2 	While an even coverage of sound across the audience area is 
generally desirable, it may be appropriate to purposefully target a lower 
sound level in certain areas such as towards the rear of a venue, at 
bars, or merchandise stands, or in areas where the audience circulates. 
This can improve choice and comfort for audience members, some of 
whom may wish to enjoy an event from a slightly quieter location. This is 
especially relevant for areas in which audience members would not be 
expected to be actively listening to the performance. A lower sound  
level also facilitates easier verbal communication in areas where this  
is important. 
F3.6.3 	Every venue is different and places unique demands upon the 
design of the sound system. A professional sound-system designer 
will be able to advise on the most suitable loudspeaker configuration 
for a particular venue or event. Software packages are also available 
that allow different loudspeaker configurations to be compared by 
predicting the sound level that will be generated at different locations 
within the audience area, although most such packages currently only 
predict the direct sound and do not take into account the acoustics  
of the venue. 
36
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 47 ===
F3.6.4 	To achieve uniform distribution of sound, and create conditions 
suitable for the sound engineer to produce a clear, impactful, and high-
quality mix, the following general precautions can be taken (46, 50–52) 
(see also Annex 9):
i)		
Try to avoid a situation in which some audience members are 
much closer to the loudspeakers than others. 
ii)	
Avoid a situation in which direct sound from the main 
loudspeakers is blocked from reaching people at the rear of the 
audience by other people in front.
iii)	
Elevate (“fly”) the loudspeakers above head height whenever 
possible.
iv)	
Pay attention to the directivity pattern of the loudspeakers and 
try to ensure that as much of the sound as possible goes to where 
it is wanted (i.e. towards the audience and away from walls and 
ceilings).
v)	
Ensure that any multi-unit loudspeaker systems (e.g. line arrays), 
have been carefully installed and are distributing sound as 
intended.
vi)	
Use secondary loudspeakers (e.g. delay-fill, front-fill or out-
fill systems) to help deliver sound to areas which the main 
loudspeakers cannot adequately cover (e.g. the rear of a large 
audience or the area beneath a balcony).
vii)	
Where there is no requirement for the sound to appear to 
originate from a specific place (e.g. in bars or clubs that play 
prerecorded music and do not have a stage), the use of a fully 
distributed (e.g. ceiling-mounted) loudspeaker system can be 
considered. With each loudspeaker only having to cover its own 
small area, sound is emitted at a lower level.
F3.6.5 	Most sound systems, especially in larger venues, incorporate 
subwoofers (loudspeakers that are dedicated to reproducing low-
frequency sound below approximately 100 Hz). It is common practice to 
place the subwoofers at ground level close to the stage which can result 
in audience members in the front rows being exposed to intense low-
frequency sound (36). Although, at present, it is unclear how much risk 
this poses to human hearing, any potential risk could be addressed by 
placing subwoofers above head height. Practical considerations relating 
to this are outlined in Annex 9. 
Feature 3: Venue acoustics and sound-system design
37

=== página 48 ===
F3.7 	 Exclusion zones in front of loudspeakers
F3.7.1 	 Sound levels increase rapidly when approaching within a 
few metres of a loudspeaker (see Annex 10) (53), therefore the area 
immediately in front of the loudspeakers is an especially hazardous 
location. It is strongly advised that no audience member be allowed 
within 1 metre of any loudspeaker. Ideally, audience members should be 
kept at least 3 metres away from loudspeakers (46).
Note: These suggested distances should be considered in light of the 
maximum output capability of the loudspeaker(s) in question, which can 
differ greatly between different makes and models. For low-powered 
loudspeakers, an exclusion zone may not be necessary, while for high-
powered loudspeakers, an exclusion zone extending beyond 3 metres 
may be required. 
F3.7.2 	Where possible, elevating the loudspeakers above head height is 
an effective solution to imposing a minimum separation from audience 
members; this will also generally lead to improved sound distribution 
(see Annex 9). In settings where this is not possible, the use of a sturdy 
barrier can prevent audience members from getting too close to the 
loudspeakers (46). 
F3.8 	 Management of on-stage sound
F3.8.1 	In small live-music venues, high levels of on-stage sound 
propagating directly into the audience area poses a major challenge for 
compliance with the sound level limit (see Box 3). The introduction of 
additional sound absorption to the venue, including around the stage 
area, to control the build-up of reverberant sound, is often important in 
tackling this issue. However, in many venues, this step alone will not  
be sufficient. Compliance with the sound level limit will require the 
active lowering of on-stage sound levels. 
F3.8.2 	The most effective approach to the control of on-stage sound 
levels is to quieten (or, where possible, remove) the loudest sources (46) 
(see Annex 11 for suggestions). 
F3.8.3 	Once loud on-stage sources have been quietened as far as 
possible, the next step is to consider reducing the amount of sound that 
propagates from the stage to the audience area. This commonly involves 
projecting the sound away from the audience or using materials to 
block sound from reaching the audience directly (46) (see Annex 11  
for suggestions). 
These measures require the cooperation and consent of the  
performers, technicians and sound engineers; they are effective  
and need not be costly. 
38
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 49 ===
Feature 4:  
Personal hearing 
protection
Personal hearing protection should be available 
to audience members at the venue/event
4

=== página 50 ===
F4.1 	 Key elements
F4.1.1 	 The wearing of hearing protection may be the only practicable 
means by which individuals can reduce their personal sound exposure 
while continuing to enjoy an event in an unrestricted way (54). 
Hearing protectors commonly include earplugs, earmuffs, and 
canal caps (55). Earplugs are the form of personal hearing protection 
considered most suitable for use in entertainment venues, although 
other forms of hearing protection, such as earmuffs, can also be 
effective. 
Earplug use among festival goers has been shown to significantly 
reduce the occurrence of temporary hearing loss and tinnitus due to 
exposure to music at high sound levels (56, 57).
Since earplugs work by physically attenuating the intensity of the 
sound reaching the eardrum, it is reasonable to expect that short-
term protection immediately after exposure translates to long-term 
protection against sound-induced hearing loss (assuming consistent  
use of earplugs over repeated exposures).
Feature 4: Personal  
hearing protection
Personal hearing protection should be available 
to audience members at the venue/event
	Feature 4 ensures that audience members have access to 
personal hearing protection at venues and events.
	While low-cost disposable earplugs can offer effective 
protection, high-fidelity earplugs designed for music offer 
better sound quality, comfort, and useability.
	Adequate instructions should be provided alongside hearing 
protection, since earplugs are only effective when worn 
properly.
40

=== página 51 ===
F4.1.2 	Earplugs are made by many different manufacturers, from 
different types of material. They come in different forms and at  
various price points. 
Some of the main ways in which earplugs can be categorized are as 
follows (in each case the least costly alternative is listed first):
i)		
single-use (disposable) vs. reusable
ii)	
ready-fit vs. custom-molded
iii)	
generic vs. music-specific (high-fidelity)
iv)	
passive vs. active (electronic).
Ready-fit earplugs can be formable (requiring a degree of manipulation 
prior to fitting) or preformed (requiring no manipulation prior to fitting).
Note: Active (electronic) earplugs feature an external microphone and 
an internal speaker and, in principle, allow for variable and selective 
attenuation of sounds at different frequencies. They are not currently in 
widespread use and are therefore not given further consideration in this 
version of the Standard.
F4.1.3 	Earplugs designed specifically for listening to music are known 
as “high-fidelity” earplugs, or sometimes “uniform-attenuation earplugs”. 
They offer significant benefits compared to generic, single-use 
earplugs (see Box 5), and their use is most appropriate on useability and 
sustainability grounds.
F4.1.4 	Custom-molded earplugs are the preferred choice of live-sound 
engineers and professional musicians for comfort and sound quality. 
They are also potentially well-suited for use by audience members, 
especially those who attend venues or events regularly. However, since 
their manufacture requires ear impressions to be taken by a trained 
specialist and they are relatively costly, it is not possible to provide them 
on demand at venues and events (54). 
Governments and health-care providers are encouraged to consider 
whether custom-molded earplugs could be provided to individuals cost-
free, or at a subsidized cost, as an important component of preventative 
hearing health care. To ensure best performance, the attenuation 
of custom-molded earplugs should be verified through a real-ear 
attenuation at threshold test procedure (58).
Feature 4: Personal hearing protection
41

=== página 52 ===
Box 5: 
High-fidelity versus generic earplugs for music
Unlike generic earplugs, high-fidelity earplugs are designed to 
attenuate sounds approximately equally at all frequencies, which 
leads to a more natural sound quality (54, 59–61). As illustrated in 
the figure below, generic foam earplugs generally attenuate high 
frequencies far more than low frequencies, making music sound 
muffled and less enjoyable.
Frequency (Hz)
125
0
10
20
30
40
50
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
Real-ear attenuation (dB)
High-ﬁdelity
earplugs
Image of high-ﬁdelity earplugs courtesy of Crescendo 
Hearing Protection. Image of foam earplugs courtesy of 3M
Foam earplugs
While high-fidelity earplugs cost more than generic earplugs, 
and typically do not provide as much attenuation overall, their 
sound-quality advantage makes them more compatible with the 
enjoyment of amplified music. 
A lesser amount of overall attenuation is not necessarily a negative 
attribute as most users will want to hear the music clearly and with 
some sense of loudness preserved. In principle, even a reduction 
of 6 dB across all frequencies offers a 4-fold increase in the time 
for which exposure to a given sound level is safe. An earplug that 
provides a consistent, but moderate, amount of attenuation will  
also make it easier for users to converse without the need to 
temporarily remove hearing protection.
It is important to note that, in practice, not all earplugs marketed 
as being suitable for music and offering flat attenuation across 
frequencies meet that claim (62). The “What Plug?” tool provided by 
HEARsmart* offers helpful information and reviews of high-fidelity 
earplugs for music listening.‡
* 	 What Plug? Resource. Available at: https://hearsmart.org/earplugs/what_plug/. 
‡ 	 At present availability is limited to the Australian market only.
42
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 53 ===
F4.1.5 	
Earplugs are effective at 
attenuating sounds only if worn properly; 
the attenuation achieved by most untrained 
wearers falls below the manufacturer’s stated 
performance (54, 63). It is therefore important 
that clear instructions for usage are provided 
with earplugs of all types. Usage instructions 
can be provided in written or video form.
F4.1.6 	
While all those visiting venues or 
attending events where amplified music 
is played should consider using hearing 
protection, it is especially important for (54):
•	people who attend venues or events regularly;
•	people who are employed in a noisy workplace;
•	people exposed to other personal or environmental sources of high 
sound levels, e.g. those listening to music over personal audio devices;
•	people with existing hearing problems, such as hearing loss or tinnitus, 
to prevent any worsening of their condition; and
•	children who visit events or venues. 
Note: Hearing protectors suitable for use by children should be made 
available at venues and events targeting children or where children are 
likely to be part of the audience.
F4.2 	 Performance requirements
F4.2.1 	Earplugs for use at music venues and events must reliably 
provide a meaningful level of protection from hearing injury, yet at the 
same time they should allow audience members to continue to hear 
and enjoy the music and to converse comfortably. This means that the 
earplugs should provide enough, but not too much, sound attenuation.
F4.2.2 	To ensure that earplugs provide a reasonable minimum level of 
protection, a laboratory-measured real-ear attenuation of 12 dB7 or more 
should be achieved by at least 84% of inexperienced subjects upon self-
fitting (the “assumed protection value”).
Based on the average long-term spectrum of live sound (see  
Annex 3), an earplug meeting these requirements generally ensures  
that an unprotected sound level of 100 dB LAeq, 15min is reduced to  
Hearing protectors 
suitable for use by 
children should be made 
available at venues 
and events targeting 
children or where 
children are likely to be 
part of the audience.
7	 12 dB real-ear attenuation in each of the 250 Hz, 500 Hz, 1 kHz, 2 kHz, and 4 kHz 
octave bands.
Feature 4: Personal hearing protection
43

=== página 54 ===
88 dB LAeq, 15min or lower when worn. This, combined with the sound 
level limit (Feature 1), should be sufficient to protect the hearing of 
an audience member who attends venues or events for up to around 
six hours a week on average (see Annex 2). This is equivalent to the 
protection which is typically afforded to workers under occupational 
noise regulations (27, 54). However, it is important to recognize that this 
ignores sound exposure in environments other than the one in question.
Note: The assumed protection value based on a protection performance 
of 84% can be estimated for each octave band as the mean attenuation 
across a panel of 16 or more subjects minus one standard deviation (64).
F4.2.3	 It is important to be aware that while 
earplugs are often marketed with a certain 
“dB rating”, such claims are often based on 
tests conducted under favourable conditions 
(for example, where an experimenter fits the 
earplugs to each subject’s ears and ensures 
an optimal fit). An average user is unlikely to 
achieve the claimed level of attenuation in 
real-world use. For this reason, the minimum 
performance criteria in this Standard are 
specified in terms of the assumed protection 
value – i.e. the attenuation expected to be 
achieved by at least 84% of inexperienced 
users upon self-fitting of the earplugs (64).
F4.2.4	Earplugs should also meet all other 
minimum requirements  
for construction, design, performance, 
marking, and user information,  
as specified in an applicable national or international standard  
(for example, standards set in Australia, Europe and the United States  
of America) (65–67).
F4.3	 Provision at venues and events
F4.3.1 	Audience members should have access to suitable hearing 
protection at venues and events upon request, either cost-free or at  
an affordable cost. 
Earplugs for use at 
music venues and 
events must reliably 
provide a meaningful 
level of protection from 
hearing injury, yet at 
the same time they 
should allow audience 
members to continue 
to hear and enjoy the 
music and to converse 
comfortably.
44
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 55 ===
F4.3.2	Without placing undue financial burden on audience members, 
the uptake of high-fidelity, reusable earplugs should be encouraged 
over basic, single-use earplugs as a more environmentally sustainable 
option. Such earplugs also offer a higher-quality listening experience, 
making it more likely that hearing protection is accepted and used 
consistently by audience members. 
F4.3.3 	The earplugs should be available to audience members at an 
accessible location (or locations) throughout the duration of an event. 
While earplugs may be offered to audience members upon entrance 
to the venue or event, there should also be an option for audience 
members wishing to acquire earplugs once an event is underway.
F4.3.4 	Where possible, and to suit different ears, multiple sizes of 
earplugs should be made available to audience members at the venue 
or event. This is especially relevant for events that target children and 
where children are expected to attend.
F4.3.5 	In addition to the printed instructions provided on the 
manufacturer’s packaging, audience members should be directed 
towards a reliable source of online information where they can find video 
instructions on the correct use of the earplugs. This could be achieved, 
for example, by using a QR code on the packaging or on signage at the 
location where the earplugs are provided.
Feature 4: Personal hearing protection
45

=== página 56 ===
Feature 5:  
Quiet zones
A designated quiet zone or zones will allow audience 
members to rest their ears from high sound levels
5

=== página 57 ===
F5.1 	 Key elements
F5.1.1	 A quiet zone is a designated place at a venue or event that 
audience members can go to give their ears a rest from exposure 
to high levels of sound. This could help to reduce the risk of sound-
induced hearing loss in multiple ways (see Box 6) (10). Young people 
who attend events involving amplified music have indicated an interest 
and willingness to take advantage of quiet zones to help protect their 
hearing (68). 
F5.1.2 	 The provision of one or more quiet zones at a venue or event 
should collectively, and safely, accommodate a reasonable proportion 
of the audience (71). A target of at least 10 per cent of total audience 
capacity is suggested, although it is recognized that the practicality of 
achieving this is dependent on venue size, structure, and layout. 
F5.1.3 	 Quiet zones should be clearly signed and accessible to audience 
members throughout the duration of the event. At permanent venues, 
outside areas should only be designated as a quiet zone if they 
are suitable for occupation in inclement weather and can be used 
throughout the duration of the event without contravening any local 
planning restrictions or environmental noise regulations (46, 71). 
F5.1.4 	Audience members should not become more exposed to other 
health hazards (for example, cigarette smoke) while making use of a 
quiet zone.
Feature 5:  
Quiet zones
A designated quiet zone or zones will allow audience 
members to rest their ears from high sound levels
	Feature 5 provides a place for audience members to go to give  
their ears a rest from high levels of sound.
	Guidance is provided on suitable acoustic conditions and 
ambient sound levels in quiet zones.
	Alternative ways of offering periods of respite from high sound 
levels are suggested where venues cannot accommodate a  
quiet zone.
47

=== página 58 ===
Box 6: 
Benefits of giving the ears a rest from  
high sound levels
Relative sound dose over 4 hr
=time spent in quiet
zone (<80 dB LAeq)
100%
96%
92%
88%
75%
50%
10
min
20
min
30
min
2 hr
1 hr
There is a scarcity of studies and 
evidence that indicate the effectiveness 
of quiet zones in reducing the risk of 
hearing loss. However, there is clear 
evidence to show that the less time a 
person spends exposed to high sound 
levels, the lower their risk of hearing 
injury (10, 23). 
The figure to the left shows that, when 
a person spends a greater proportion 
of their time in a quiet zone, the relative 
sound dose (a measure of cumulative 
sound exposure) received reduces 
accordingly over the course  
of the event. This in turn can result  
in a reduced risk of hearing injury  
(10, 23, 27).
While it is necessary for a person to spend considerable time  
(e.g. 30–60 minutes during the course of a 4-hour event), in a quiet 
zone to substantially reduce their overall exposure, there are other 
reasons why it may be beneficial to regularly give the ears a rest:
•	There is some evidence that, by allowing partial recovery of the 
ear’s delicate structures, regular periods of rest during otherwise 
continuous sound exposure have a protective effect exceeding 
that expected based on the modest reduction in cumulative 
sound dose alone (69, 70).
•	It is often only after entering a quiet environment that the 
perceptual effects of over-exposure to high sound levels (e.g. 
ringing in the ears, sounds seeming muffled, difficulty conversing) 
become clear. At this point individuals may be more likely to adopt 
self-protective behaviours, such as making use of personal hearing 
protection.
48
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 59 ===
F5.2 	 Acoustic conditions within quiet zones
F5.2.1 	 For a quiet zone to be effective, sound levels must be 
purposefully kept to a level that poses minimal risk of causing or 
exacerbating any sound-induced hearing loss and that allows a degree 
of recovery of the delicate physiological structures within the inner ear 
following exposure to high sound levels. Audience members should also 
be able to converse without needing to raise their voices. 
F5.2.2 	To achieve this, the ambient sound level within a quiet zone 
should be kept as far below 70 dB LAeq, 15min (23) as is reasonably 
practicable.
The ambient sound level may be determined by sources such as 
mechanical ventilation noise, ingress of transportation noise from 
outside the building, low-level ambient music, or leakage of sound 
into the quiet zone from adjoining spaces in which music is played or 
performed at high levels (46).
Sounds generated by the occupants of the quiet zone are excluded 
since, in practice, the level of these sounds would be extremely difficult 
to control. Ensuring that the ambient sound level in the quiet zone is, 
at most, moderate, creates conditions in which the overall sound levels 
naturally remain below 70 dB LAeq, 15min much of the time, even when 
factoring in the activity of the occupants.
F5.2.3 	Indoor quiet zones should feature a reasonable amount of sound 
absorption (e.g. carpet, drapes, curtains, soft furnishings, or dedicated 
sound-absorbing panels) to control the build-up of reverberant sound. 
A suggested minimum is 20% of the total surface area of the walls and 
ceiling of the quiet zone. Absorption should be distributed around the 
room. This helps to prevent sound levels spiralling upwards when the 
room is occupied.
F5.2.4 	Internal partitions separating a quiet zone from an adjacent 
space in which music is played or performed at high levels should be 
of a suitable construction to stop excessive sound leakage into the 
quiet zone. In general, either a solid masonry wall or a double-skinned 
partition of sufficient mass is likely to be required. 
Feature 5: Quiet zones
49

=== página 60 ===
F5.2.5 	Where a quiet zone directly adjoins a space in which 
music is played or performed at high levels, the spaces should be 
separated by two well-sealed door sets at either end of a lobby 
lined with sound-absorbing material. This helps to reduce airborne 
sound transmission into the quiet zone as people enter and leave 
through the doors.
F5.3 	 Alternative ways of offering respite from 
high sound levels
F5.3.1 	 In some venues, it may be impossible to provide a quiet 
zone of appropriate size because of space, architectural, fire safety, 
or access constraints (46).
In such cases, it is still beneficial to offer audience members 
periods of respite from high sound levels. Such measures might 
include, but are not limited to:
i)		
temporarily dropping the level of any prerecorded music  
that is being played through the sound system to below  
70 dB LAeq, 15min at periodic intervals (e.g. during the 
changeover between acts); and
ii)	
ensuring that sound levels are kept to a low-to-moderate 
level in auxiliary areas, such as bar areas, corridors, lobbies, 
and toilets.
F5.3.2 	These alternative measures do little to reduce the 
cumulative sound exposure for audience members while at the 
venue or event. Nonetheless, importantly, they allow audience 
members an opportunity to recognize in themselves the signs  
of ear fatigue and consider adopting self-protective behaviours 
such as the use of personal hearing protection. 
50
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 61 ===
Box 7. 
Case study: Quiet zones in Swiss music venues 
According to the Swiss Ordinance to the Federal Act on Protection 
against the Risks associated with Non-Ionising Radiation and with 
Sound (O-NIRSA) (71, 72), quiet areas (respite areas) must be provided 
when an event has an hourly sound level of up to 100 dB(A) and a 
duration longer than 3 hours. The quiet area must comply with the 
following requirements:
•	the average sound level must not exceed 85 dB LAeq, 1hr;
•	the area must make up at least 10 per cent of the total area provided 
for the audience at the event;
•	the area must be clearly marked and readily accessible to audience 
members throughout the event;
•	more than 50% of the quiet area must be a smoke-free zone.
Ofﬁce
Restrooms
Bar
Danceﬂoor
Adequate sound insulation
to prevent sound leakage
into the quiet area 
A convoluted path for sound to reach the 
quiet area, combined with sound absorbing 
ﬁnishes in the bar, reduces sound leakage 
as people come and go between the bar 
and the danceﬂoor
Background music loudspeakers in the bar 
are directed away from the quiet area
Lounge/Quiet Area
Stage
Image courtesy of Raphael Elmiger,  
Federal Office of Public Health Switzerland.
Feature 5: Quiet zones
51

=== página 62 ===
Box 7. 
Case study: Quiet zones in Swiss music venues  
(continued)
Experience in Switzerland shows that patrons typically make use of quiet 
zones for multiple purposes, beyond resting their ears. These include:
•	to chat with friends if sound levels are too high to do so comfortably in 
the main venue room;
•	to eat or drink; 
•	to rest during long parties; and
•	to smoke (where permitted). 
Interviews with venue owners and industry representatives in 
Switzerland have identified important considerations when planning a 
quiet zone:
•	A suitably low ambient sound level in the quiet zone can be difficult to 
achieve if too much sound is leaking from the main room:
	– Ensure adequate sound insulation between the main room and the 
quiet zone.
	– Ensure that loudspeakers (especially high-frequency drivers) are not 
directed towards the quiet zone. 
•	Patrons may not want to make use of an unsuitable quiet zone:
	– Design the quiet zone to be a comfortable and attractive space.
	– Try to avoid the use of smokers’ lounges, hallways, or other rooms 
without infrastructure as quiet zones. 
•	Finding suitable space for a quiet zone is challenging for smaller 
venues with limited space.
•	Some patrons prefer to take a break outdoors, so try to facilitate this 
where possible:
	– Avoid one-way entry policies that prevent guests from re-entering 
after stepping outdoors.
	– Outdoor breaks must be balanced against the risk of noise 
disturbance to neighbouring properties.
52
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 63 ===
Feature 6:  
Provision of training  
and information
Appropriate training and information about safe 
listening is needed and must be provided 
6

=== página 64 ===
F6.1 	 Key elements
F6.1.1 	 Raising awareness among audiences and people working in 
the music and entertainment industries about the risk of permanent 
hearing injury following exposure to high sound levels, and the 
safe listening practices that can help to reduce that risk, is critical 
to achieving the overarching goal of this Standard: to create an 
environment in which people are empowered to enjoy amplified music 
while protecting their ears (73–76).
F6.1.2 	 It must be acknowledged that many people who attend or 
work at venues and events do so because they enjoy the feelings and 
sensations associated with listening to music at high levels. Effective 
health communication messaging around safe listening must reflect 
this reality (76–78).
Feature 6: Provision 
of training and 
information
Appropriate training and information about safe 
listening is needed and must be provided 
	Feature 6 aims to make staff and audience members aware of 
the practical steps that can be taken to make listening safer 
and the importance of doing so.
	All staff in managerial, technical, and patron-facing roles 
should have a basic awareness of the safe listening measures in 
operation at the venue or event. 
	More in-depth training is required for individuals who have 
responsibility for monitoring and controlling the sound level.
	Audience members should be provided with information about 
safe listening on tickets and on notices at the venue or event.
	A venue or event that has been certified by a competent 
authority as adequately implementing the features of this 
Standard may identify as a “safe listening venue” or “safe 
listening event”. 
54

=== página 65 ===
F6.2 	 Training
F6.2.1 	All venue or event staff employed in managerial, technical, and 
patron-facing roles should receive basic training that covers (79):
i)		
the risk of suffering permanent hearing injury due to exposure to 
high sound levels; and
ii)	
the safe listening measures that are in operation at the venue or 
event.
F6.2.2 	Individuals who are responsible for monitoring and controlling 
the sound level (the “responsible actor” under F1.4) should receive more 
in-depth training that, in addition to the above, covers:
i)		
the operation of the sound level measurement system (including, 
where relevant, procedures for maintenance and calibration);
ii)	
how to interpret the measured LAeq, 15min sound level;
iii)	
the sound level limit (or effective sound level limit – see Annex 5)  
that must be adhered to; and
iv)	
how to control the output level (volume) of the sound system.
F6.2.3 	Training should be refreshed at regular intervals, and when new 
staff members join, to ensure that skills and knowledge are kept up to 
date.
F6.2.4 	Preliminary proposals have been put forward for a global training 
and certification scheme for live sound engineers (79). Such a scheme 
could play a valuable role in developing the knowledge and skillset of 
live sound engineers, and in particular help equip them to tackle some 
of the unique challenges of controlling audience sound exposure in 
live-music settings. This could include negotiating with performers to 
reduce on-stage sound levels, and achieving a high-quality mix while 
complying with a sound level limit (80).
F6.3 	 Information for audiences
F6.3.1 	Where high sound levels are anticipated at a venue or event, 
electronic and printed tickets could include a warning about the risk 
of permanent hearing injury, alongside a link or QR code directing 
audience members towards a reliable source of information about safe 
listening (for example, the WHO Make Listening Safe FAQs). 
Feature 6: Feature 6:	Provision of training and information
55

=== página 66 ===
F6.3.2 	Notices should be prominently 
displayed at the entrance to venues and 
events and in visible locations inside 
venues (e.g. at bars or on internal doors) 
informing the audience about the safe 
listening measures that are in operation. 
These notices should as a minimum:
i)	
state that the sound level is being 
monitored;
ii)	
state where audience members can 
obtain hearing protection;
iii)	
state the location of any quiet 
zone(s); and
iv)	
include a link or QR code directing 
audience members towards a 
reliable source of information 
about safe listening (for example, 
the WHO Make Listening Safe 
webpage). 
F6.4 	 Identification as a “safe listening venue”  
or “safe listening event”
F6.4.1 	Where a venue or event has been certified by a competent 
authority as adequately implementing the features of this Standard,  
it may identify as a “safe listening venue” or “safe listening event”.  
This could include the use of these (or similar) phrases on notices,  
on tickets, and in event listings and other marketing materials, online 
and in print.
F6.4.2 	If a venue or event fails to meet the ongoing requirements of 
this Standard, as regards monitoring of sound levels, for example, then it 
ceases to be a “safe listening venue” or “safe listening event” and should 
immediately stop using either of those phrases in its online and printed 
materials. 
F6.4.3 	Governments may consider putting in place a mechanism to 
certify the status of venues and events to prevent unauthorized use of 
the “safe listening venue” or “safe listening event” labels and to allow 
audience members to look up the certification status of a venue or event.
!
56
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 67 ===
Adoption and 
implementation of  
the WHO Standard  
for Safe Listening  
Venues and Events

=== página 68 ===
Adoption and implementation 
of the WHO Standard for Safe 
Listening Venues and Events
This Standard is designed to support countries, owners and managers 
of entertainment venues and events, and civil society, in approaching 
hearing loss prevention in a way that is strategic, evidence-based, and 
user-friendly.
 Adoption and implementation  
by governments
Implementation of this Standard can be promoted in the following ways:
Legislation or regulation: relevant departments in the government 
should develop appropriate laws/regulations/policies that address the 
issue of sound exposure mitigation in venues or events where amplified 
music is played. Such regulations should be based on the WHO global 
standard and developed through collaborative engagement with 
stakeholders including:
•		different government departments such as health, education, 
environment, youth and culture;
•	experts in acoustics and sound-system design;
•	civil society groups, including associations of hard-of-hearing; NGOs, 
professional societies;
•	youth organizations;
•	associations of venue owners;
•	major event organizers;
•	consumer protection organizations; and
•	others relevant to the context of the country.
It is anticipated that the diverse stakeholders will have varied and, at 
times, contradicting interests and opinions. A skilled chairperson must 
be appointed to coordinate the discussions. The aim would be to bring 
all groups to the common understanding of reducing exposure to 
amplified music at excessively high sound pressure levels. This could 
greatly facilitate the uptake of, compliance with, and acceptance of, the 
measures proposed in this Standard.
58

=== página 69 ===
Support to venue owners and event organizers: the role of government 
or regulatory bodies should extend beyond development and 
implementation of regulations. They should partner with venue owners 
to ensure safe listening for the public, supporting them in this effort. 
Special attention should be given to:
•	smaller inner-city venues that may have limitations of space and 
resources and hence may find it difficult to implement all features 
outlined in this Standard. Reasonable accommodations should be 
made in the policies for such venues while maintaining the required 
sound level limits. Specific implementation strategies for such venues 
have been discussed throughout this document.
•	ensuring that venue owners do not face undue financial hardships 
or threats to their business model in implementing the Standard. 
Wherever possible, financial support should be considered for these 
businesses. An example of this is in Norway where the government has 
implemented a not-for-profit programme to help improve acoustics 
and sound systems in new and existing venues (see case study  
in Box 8).
Certification of safe listening venues: as mentioned in F6.4, 
governments should consider establishing a mechanism to certify 
venues or events as “safe listening”. Due process for certification and 
regular monitoring is essential to ensure that the label is not misused.
Public awareness campaigns: along with legislation and other policies 
to implement the Standard, governments should launch a public 
awareness campaign within their country to raise awareness about:
•	the risks posed by high sound levels, especially those experienced  
in recreational settings; and
•	safe listening practices that can reduce the risk of hearing loss  
among listeners
 Voluntary adoption by owners and managers  
of entertainment venues and events
Owners and managers of entertainment venues, concert halls, clubs, 
bars, gyms, or other venues where amplified music is played, as well 
as organizers of music festivals or other relevant events, can voluntarily 
implement all or some of the features outlined in this Standard, 
depending on what may be feasible. Sound engineers, technicians, 
and others involved with sound management at venues and events 
should also familiarize themselves with the features outlined here and 
implement them as part of good practice.
Adoption and implementation of the WHO Standard for Safe Listening Venues and Events
59

=== página 70 ===
Investing in the hearing health of audiences and customers makes 
good business sense for an industry that relies on the hearing ability 
of its clients. Moreover, research shows that many people leave venues 
or events dissatisfied with having experienced sound levels that they 
consider to have been too high (68, 74). Reduction in sound levels, along 
with improved venue acoustics and sound-system design, may well 
encourage people to spend more time at these venues and events, 
knowing that they will be able to enjoy high-quality sound without 
discomfort or risk to their hearing. 
 Schools of music and other institutions with education or 
training programmes on acoustics, sound engineering, and 
sound level management; as well as industry associations
Content on safe listening rationale and the features of this Standard 
should be included in the curriculum of all relevant courses that educate 
or train people involved in the creation, production, or performance 
of amplified music. Deans and professors of such institutions should 
ensure that a module on safe listening is included within the course 
curriculum. The module should focus on:
•	the importance of hearing health;
•	the effect of sound on the auditory system and human body;
•	the prevention of sound-induced hearing loss;
•	the principles of safe listening; and
•	the features of the WHO Global standard for safe listening venues  
and events.
Furthermore, relevant industry associations representing musicians, 
audio engineers and others, should advocate on behalf of their cohort 
for the implementation of the features of this Standard: minimizing 
hearing risks is in the interest of the groups they represent.
60
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 71 ===
Box 8. 
Supporting venues to make improvements:  
a case study from Norway 
Kulturrom is a not-for-profit organization that supports privately owned 
venues and rehearsal spaces in Norway, including for the purpose of 
improving facilities and equipment in order to achieve safer listening 
conditions. The organization receives funding each year from the 
Norwegian Department of Culture and Equality, via the Norwegian 
national lottery.
New venues, and those undergoing renovation, can apply for financial 
support for the following issues:
•	Acoustic assessment 
	– This includes assessment of the venue by a professional acoustician. 
Having a report of assessment is a pre-requisite for eligibility to 
apply for further funding.
•	Acoustic treatment
	– This includes improvements in venue acoustics, based on the 
recommendations of the independent acoustic report.
•	Equipment purchase
	– This includes the purchase or upgrade of equipment such as sound 
systems, mixing desks, lighting rigs, shared-use backline equipment 
(drum kits, amplifiers).
•	Maintenance 
	– This includes the assessment of existing equipment by a 
professional, repairs, and upgrades to ensure proper functioning. 
Financial support is usually granted based on 75% funding of the 
total cost, with the venue contributing the remaining 25%. Each year, 
Kulturrom awards around 4 million Euros, and since starting in 2009, has 
invested close to 35 million Euros to improve concert venues, theatres, 
multipurpose houses, and rehearsal spaces. Each year around 200 
initiatives receive funding – from small choirs to large concert venues.
For some years, Kulturrom has funded many venues to make 
improvements that have helped to achieve safer listening conditions for 
audience members by improving the venue acoustics and/or upgrading 
the sound system.
Kulturrom has also provided funding to install sound level measurement 
systems in more than 100 venues in Norway. These systems not only 
support individual venues in monitoring sound levels, they have also 
provided invaluable research data to inform safe-listening guidelines 
and regulations (35).‡ 
‡ 	 Støfringsdal B. Expected sound levels at concert venues for amplified music. 
Auditorium Acoustics. Hamburg, Germany; 2018.
Adoption and implementation of the WHO Standard for Safe Listening Venues and Events
61

=== página 72 ===
References
1. 	
Meyer-bisch C. Epidemiological evaluation of hearing damage 
related to strongly amplified music (personal cassette players, 
discotheques, rock concerts) – high-definition audiometric survey 
on 1364 subjects. Audiology. 1996; 35(3):121–142.
2. 	
Biassoni EC, Serra MR, Richtert U, Joekes S, Yacci MR, Carignani JA 
et al. Recreational noise exposure and its effects on the hearing of 
adolescents. Part II: development of hearing disorders. Int J Audiol. 
2005; 44(2):74–85.
3. 	
Serra MR, Biassoni EC, Richter U, Minoldo G, Franco G, Abraham S 
et al. Recreational noise exposure and its effects on the hearing of 
adolescents. Part I: an interdisciplinary long-term study. Int J Audiol. 
2005; 44(2):65–73.
4. 	 Biassoni EC, Serra MR, Hinalaf M, Abraham M, Pavlik M, Villalobo JP 
et al. Hearing and loud music exposure in a group of adolescents at 
the ages of 14–15 and retested at 17–18. Noise Health. 2014; 16(72):331–
341.
5. 	
Ivory R, Kane R, Diaz RC. Noise-induced hearing loss: a recreational 
noise perspective. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2014; 
22(5):394–398.
6. 	 Serra MR, Biassoni EC, Hinalaf M, Abraham M, Pavlik M, Villalobo 
JP et al. Hearing and loud music exposure in 14–15 years old 
adolescents. Noise Health. 2014; 16(72):320–330.
7. 	
Keppler H, Dhooge I, Vinck B. Hearing in young adults. Part II: The 
effects of recreational noise exposure. Noise Health. 2015; 17(78):245–
252.
8. 	 Gjestland T, Tronstad TV. The efficacy of sound regulations on the 
listening levels of pop concerts. J Occup Environ Hyg. 2017; 14(1):17–
22.
9. 	 Pienkowski M. Loud music and leisure noise is a common cause 
of chronic hearing loss, tinnitus and hyperacusis. Int J Environ Res 
Public Health. 2021; 18(8):4236.
10. 	 Hearing loss due to recreational exposure to loud sounds: a review. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015.
11. 	 Kujawa SG, Liberman MC. Adding insult to injury: cochlear nerve 
degeneration after “temporary” noise-induced hearing loss. J 
Neurosci. 2009; 29(45):14077–14085.
62

=== página 73 ===
12. 	 World report on hearing. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/339913, accessed 5 February 
2022).
13. 	 Schink T, Kreutz G, Busch V, Pigeot I, Ahrens W. Incidence and 
relative risk of hearing disorders in professional musicians. Occup 
Environ Med. 2014; 71(7):472–476.
14. 	 Bohne BA, Kimlinger M, Harding GW. Time course of organ of Corti 
degeneration after noise exposure. Hear Res. 2017; 344:158–169.
15. 	 Fernandez KA, Jeffers PW, Lall K, Liberman MC, Kujawa SG. Aging 
after noise exposure: acceleration of cochlear synaptopathy in 
“recovered” ears. J Neurosci. 2015; 35(19):7509–7520.
16. 	 LePage EL, Murray NM. Latent cochlear damage in personal stereo 
users: a study based on click-evoked otoacoustic emissions. Med J 
Aust. 1998; 169(11–12):588–592.
17. 	 Liberman MC, Kujawa SG. Cochlear synaptopathy in acquired 
sensorineural hearing loss: manifestations and mechanisms. Hear 
Res. 2017; 349:138–147.
18. 	 Kobel M, Le Prell CG, Liu J, Hawks JW, Bao J. Noise-induced cochlear 
synaptopathy: past findings and future studies. Hear Res. 2017; 
349:148–154.
19. 	 Fernandez KA, Guo D, Micucci S, De Gruttola V, Liberman MC, 
Kujawa SG. Noise-induced cochlear synaptopathy with and without 
sensory cell loss. Neuroscience. 2020; 427:43–57.
20. 	 Schaette R, McAlpine D. Tinnitus with a normal audiogram: 
physiological evidence for hidden hearing loss and computational 
model. J Neurosci. 2011; 31(38):13452–13457.
21. 	 Zheng Y, Guan J. Cochlear synaptopathy: a review of hidden hearing 
loss. J Otorhinolaryngol Disord Treat. 2018; 1(1).
22. 	 Liberman MC, Epstein MJ, Cleveland SS, Wang H, Maison SF. Toward 
a differential diagnosis of hidden hearing loss in humans. PLoS One. 
2016; 11(9):e0162726.
23. 	 Environmental noise guidelines for the European Region. World 
Health Organization; 2018 (https://www.euro.who.int/en/health-
topics/environment-and-health/noise/environmental-noise-
guidelines-for-the-european-region, accessed 27 November 2021).
24. 	 WHO-ITU global standard for safe listening devices and systems. 
World Health Organization; 2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/330020, accessed 27 November 2021).
References
63

=== página 74 ===
25. 	 Beach EF, Mulder J, O’Brien I, Cowan R. Overview of laws and 
regulations aimed at protecting the hearing of patrons within 
entertainment venues. Eur J Public Health. 2020; 31(1):227–233.
26. 	 Beach EF, Cowan R, Mulder J, O’Brien I. Regulations to reduce risk of 
hearing damage in concert venues. Bull World Health Organ. 2020; 
98(5):367–369.
27. 	 Neitzel RL, Fligor BJ. Risk of noise-induced hearing loss due to 
recreational sound: review and recommendations. J Acoust Soc Am. 
2019; 146(5):3911–3921.
28. 	 Mulder J, McGinnity S. Sound level measurement, monitoring, 
management, and documentation in music venues. Make Listening 
Safe. World Health Organization; May 2020.
29. 	 Hill AJ, Burton J. A case study on the impact live event sound 
level regulations have on sound engineering practice. Institute of 
Acoustics; 2020.
30. 	 Hill A, Mulder J, Burton J, Kok M, Lawrence M. Sound level 
monitoring at live events. Part 2: regulations, practices, and 
preferences. J. Audio Eng. Soc. 2022;70(1/2):62-72.
31. 	 Berglund B, Lindvall T, Schwela D, Goh KT. Guidelines for community 
noise. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2000 (https://apps.who.
int/iris/handle/10665/66217, accessed 27 November 2021).
32. 	 Welch D, Fremaux G. Why do people like loud sound? A qualitative 
study. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2017; 14(8):908.
33. 	 Williams W, Beach EF, Gilliver M. Clubbing: the cumulative effect of 
noise exposure from attendance at dance clubs and night clubs on 
whole-of-life noise exposure. Noise Health. 2010; 12(48):155–158.
34. 	Roberts B, Neitzel RL. Noise exposure limit for children in 
recreational settings: review of available evidence. J Acoust Soc Am. 
2019; 146(5):3922–3933.
35. 	 Edvardsen MA. Analysis of measurements from Norwegian venues 
for amplified music. Master’s thesis in Civil and Environmental 
Engineering. Norwegian University of Science and Technology; 2021.
36. 	 Hill AJ, Kok M, Mulder J, Burton J, Kociper A, Berrios A. A case study 
on sound level monitoring and management at large-scale music 
festivals. Milton Keynes: Institute of Acoustics; 2019.
37. 	 McGinnity S, Mulder J, Beach EF, Cowan R. Management of sound 
levels in live music venues. J Audio Eng Soc. 2019; 67(12):972–985.
64
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 75 ===
38. 	 Sandell J, Berntson A, Sjösten P, Blomgren G, Kähäri K. Acoustic 
intervention in a live music club. Acta Acustica united with Acustica. 
2007; 93(5):843–849.
39. 	 Music Venue Trust (2015). Understanding small music venues.
40. 	Mulder J, McGinnity S. Sound level measurement, monitoring, 
management, and documentation in music venues. Make Listening 
Safe. World Health Organization; May 2020. 
41. 	 Commission IE. IEC 61672-1:2013 Electroacoustics. Sound level 
meters – Part 1: Specifications; 2013.
42. 	 Commission IE. IEC 61672-3:2013 Electroacoustics. Sound level 
meters – Periodic tests; 2013.
43. 	Celestina M, Hrovat J, Kardous CA. Smartphone-based sound level 
measurement apps: Evaluation of compliance with international 
sound level meter standards. Applied Acoustics. 2018; 139:119–128.
44. 	Commission IE. IEC 60942:2017 Electroacoustics. Sound calibrators; 
2017.
45. 	Measurement protocol for noise covenant in the Netherlands, 2019 
(https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2020/03/20/
meetprotocol-convenant-geluid-nederland-2019, accessed 29 
November 2021).
46. 	Wiggins IM, Liston K. Sound distribution for safe listening in 
entertainment venues: a review. Make Listening Safe. World Health 
Organization; September 2020.
47. 	 Adelman-Larsen N, Thompson E. The importance of bass clarity in 
pop and rock venues. J Acoust Soc Am. 2008; 123:3090.
48. Rindel J. New Norwegian standard on the acoustics of rooms for 
music rehearsal and performance. 2014; 10.13140/2.1.4374.1440. 
49. 	 Fuchs HV, Zha X. Requirement for low-frequency reverberation 
in spaces for music: Part 1: smaller rooms for different uses. 
Psychomusicology: Music, Mind, and Brain. 2015; 25(3):272–281.
50. 	 Corteel E, Coste-Dombre H, Combet C, Horyn Y, Montignies 
F. On the efficiency of flown vs. ground-stacked subwoofer 
configurations. 145th Convention of the Audio Engineering Society, 
New York, USA. 2018.
51. 	 Moore JB, Hill AJ. Dynamic diffuse signal processing for sound 
reinforcement and reproduction. J Audio Eng Soc. 2018; 66(11):953–
965.
References
65

=== página 76 ===
52. 	 Hill A, Beale C, Begault D, Burton J, Corteel E, Frick C et al. Technical 
Document AESTD1007.1.20-05: Understanding and managing 
sound exposure and noise pollution at outdoor events. New York: 
Audio Engineering Society; 2020.
53. 	 McCarthy, B. Sound systems: design and optimization. Modern 
techniques and tools for sound system design and alignment. Taylor 
& Francis Group; Oxford, UK; 2016.
54. 	Portnuff C, Claycomb S. Hearing protection use in recreational 
music exposure: a review and analysis of the literature. Make 
Listening Safe. World Health Organization; May 2020.
55. 	 Choose the hearing protection that’s right for you. National Institute 
of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), USA (https://www.cdc.
gov/niosh/topics/noise/choose.html, accessed 27 November 2021). 
56. 	 Ramakers GG, Kraaijenga VJ, Cattani G, van Zanten GA, Grolman W. 
Effectiveness of earplugs in preventing recreational noise–induced 
hearing loss: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg. 2016; 142(6):551–558.
57. 	 Kraaijenga VJ, Ramakers GG, Grolman W. The effect of earplugs 
in preventing hearing loss from recreational noise exposure: a 
systematic review. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2016; 
142(4):389–394.
58. 	 Methods for measuring the real-ear attenuation of hearing 
protectors. American National Standard. ANSI/ASA S12.6-2016 
(R2020); 2020.
59. 	 Beach E, Williams W, Gilliver M. Hearing protection for clubbers is 
music to their ears. Health Promot J Austr. 2010; 21(3):215–221.
60. 	Bockstael A, Keppler H, Botteldooren D. Musician earplugs: 
appreciation and protection. Noise Health. 2015; 17(77):198–208.
61. 	 Portnuff CD. Best practices for fitting, dispensing, and verifying 
hearing protection devices for musicians. AES International 
Conference on Music Induced Hearing Disorders, Audio Engineering 
Society; 2018.
62. 	 Beach EF. What Plug? Choosing high-fidelity earplugs for music 
listening. National Hearing Conservation Association. Spectrum. 
2018; 35(2):12–16.
63. 	 Neitzel R, Somers S, Seixas N. Variability of real-world hearing 
protector attenuation measurements. Ann Occup Hyg. 2006; 
50(7):679–691.
66
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 77 ===
64. 	Acoustics – Hearing protectors – Part 2: Estimation of effective 
A-weighted sound pressure levels when hearing protectors are 
worn. ISO 4869-2:2018 (https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso:4869:-
2:ed-2:v1:en, accessed 27 November 2021). 
65. 	 Hearing protectors – General requirements – Part 2: Earplugs. CEN 
standard EN 352-2:2020 (https://standards.iteh.ai/catalog/standards/
cen/7dab262d-722e-4744-8464-d36eda670068/en-352-2-2020, 
accessed 27 November 2021). 
66. 	 Methods for measuring the real-ear attenuation of hearing 
protectors. ANSI/ASA S12.6-2016 (R2020) (https://webstore.ansi.org/
Standards/ASA/ANSIASAS122016R2020, accessed 27 November 2021). 
67. 	 Acoustics – Hearing protectors. Standards Australia. Standards 
Catalogue: AS/NZS 1270-2002 (https://www.standards.org.au/
standards-catalogue/sa-snz/health/av-003/as-slash-nzs--1270-2002, 
accessed 27 November 2021). 
68. 	Diviani N, Chadha S, Arunda M O, Rubinelli, S. Attitudes towards 
Safe Listening Measures in Entertainment Venues: Results from an 
International Survey among Young Venue-Goers. Int J Environ Res 
Public Health. 2021; 18(23):12860.
69. 	 Suter AH. Occupational hearing loss from non-gaussian noise. 
Semin Hear. 2017; 38(3):225–262.
70. 	 Harding GW, Bohne BA. Noise-induced hair-cell loss and total 
exposure energy: analysis of a large data set. J Acoust Soc Am. 2004; 
115(5 Pt 1):2207–2220.
71. 	 Chadha S, Kamenov K. Regulation for control of sounds exposure 
in entertainment venues. Case studies from Belgium, France and 
Switzerland. Make Listening Safe. Laureyns M, Ollandini D, Fiori M, 
Horvilleur JL, Elmiger R (eds.). World Health Organization;  
December 2019.
72. 	 Hill A, Mulder J, Burton J, Kok M, Lawrence M. Sound level 
monitoring at live events, Part 3 – Improved tools and procedures.  
J. Audio Eng Soc. 2022; 70(1/2);73-82.
72. 	 Ordinance to the federal act on protection against the risks 
associated with non-ionising radiation and with sound. The Swiss 
Federal Council. 2019 (https://www.fedlex.admin.ch/eli/cc/2019/183/
en, accessed 27 November 2021). 
73. 	 Gilliver M, Beach EF, Williams W. Noise with attitude: influences on 
young people’s decisions to protect their hearing. Int J Audiol. 2013; 
52 Suppl 1:S26–S32.
References
67

=== página 78 ===
74. 	 Alnuman N, Ghnimat T. Awareness of noise-induced hearing loss 
and use of hearing protection among young adults in Jordan. Int J 
Environ Res Public Health. 2019; 16(16):2961. 
75. 	 Gopal KV, Champlin S, Phillips B. Assessment of safe listening 
intentional behavior toward personal listening devices in young 
adults. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019; 16(17):3180. 
76. 	 Meinke DK, Martin WH. Review of background materials for 
development of health communications for promotion of safe 
listening. Make Listening Safe. Altieri E, Chadha S (eds.). World 
Health Organization; February 2017.
77. 	 Diviani N, Zanini C, Amann J, Chadha S, Cieza A, Rubinelli S. 
Awareness, attitudes, and beliefs about music-induced hearing loss: 
towards the development of a health communication strategy to 
promote safe listening. Patient Educ Couns. 2019; 102(8):1506–1512. 
78. 	 Rubinelli S, Diviani N, Zanini C. Development of health 
communication aspect in safe listening devices: narrative review 
for policy brief. Make Listening Safe. World Health Organization; 
February 2018. 
79. 	 Mulder J, Hill A, Burton J, Kok M, Lawrence M, Shabalina E. 
Education and certification in sound pressure level measurement, 
monitoring and management at entertainment events. Audio 
Engineering Society. 2021.
80. 	Beach EF. Gilliver M. Time to listen: most regular patrons of music 
venues prefer lower volumes. Front Psychol. 2019; 10(607).
68
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 79 ===
69
Annex 1. 	 
A taxonomy of music 
venues 
A diverse range of venues host events that feature amplified music as 
a central element. Some of the main dimensions on which venues vary 
are (1):
•	indoor vs. outdoor (with consequent differences in acoustics);
•	whether the venue was purpose-built for music or adapted from 
another purpose;
•	whether the venue’s primary function is music or another purpose  
(e.g. sports); and
•	size and audience capacity (from tens to hundreds-of-thousands  
of people). 
The taxonomy in Figure A1.1 below describes the main variable 
dimensions for venues with amplified music.
Figure A1.1: 
A taxonomy of music venues
 
Music Venues 
Primary function is music
Capacity:
Rehearsal room/ 
Recording studio
Bar/Pub/Hotel/Youth Club
Chamber music 
Hall/Jazz club
Night Club/ 
Disco
Pop Music 
Venue
Concert Hall
Bar/Pub/Hotel  
with bandroom
Cinema/ 
Theatre
Convention 
Centre
Arena 
(closed roof)
Skating ring
Open Air 
Festival
>100
>1,000
>5,000
>30,000
Arena 
(open roof)
Stadium
Courtyard
Town Square
Oval/ 
Sports 
ground
Bandstand
Amphitheatre
Indoor
Purpose built
Adapted
Outdoor
Sub (Urban)
Adapted
Rural
Permanent
Temporary
Purpose built

=== página 80 ===
70
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS
Reference
1.	
Mulder J, McGinnity S. Sound level measurement, monitoring, 
management, and documentation in music venues. Make 
Listening Safe. World Health Organization; 2020 (https://cdn.
who.int/media/docs/default-source/documents/health-topics/
deafness-and-hearing-loss/monograph-on-sound-level-
measurement-management-and-documentation-in-music-venues.
pdf?sfvrsn=69990849_5, accessed 17 December 2021).

=== página 81 ===
71
Annex 2. 	 
Application of the WHO 
Noise Guidelines for the 
European Region to the 
sound level limit 
The 100 dB LAeq, 15min sound level limit set out in Feature 1 of the  
Standard is informed by the WHO Environmental Noise Guidelines  
for the European Region (1), which recommends: 
•	Reducing the yearly average from all leisure noise sources combined 
to 70 dB LAeq, 24h, as leisure noise above this level is associated with 
adverse health effects.
•	The equal energy principle can be used to derive exposure  
limits for other time averages, which might be more practical  
in regulatory processes. 
•	For single-event and impulse noise exposures, existing guidelines and 
legal regulations to limit the risk of increases in hearing impairment 
from leisure noise, in both children and adults, should be followed. 
•	Following a precautionary approach, to reduce possible health effects, 
policy-makers should take action to prevent exposure above the 
guideline values for average noise and single-event and impulse  
noise exposures. 
Derived from these guidelines, and informed by a review of all available 
evidence (2), the WHO-ITU global standard for safe-listening personal 
audio devices and systems (3) recommends a weekly limit of 1.6 Pa2 h 
(Pascal squared hours) per 7 days as the reference exposure, which is 
equivalent to 80 dB(A) for 40 hours a week. 

=== página 82 ===
72
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS
For parity across standards, the sound level limit for entertainment 
venues and events further applies the equal energy principle to the 
80 dB(A) for 40 hours a week recommendation. This translates into a 
sound level limit of 100 dB(A) for approximately one hour 45 minutes 
per month. A survey undertaken by WHO and its collaborating centre 
to study behaviours of the target group regarding visiting venues shows 
that the majority (65%) of respondents visit entertainment venues once 
or fewer times a month on average (4). Most people spend 1–3 hours at 
these venues (4).
Based on these observations, a 100 dB(A) level is likely to cause no harm 
to the hearing of most audience members who visit entertainment 
venues or events on average no more than once a month and for 
around 2 hours (or less) per visit. Use of personal hearing protection  
such as earplugs should provide a minimum attenuation of 12 dB(A)  
(see Feature 4). This can increase the safe-listening period for its users  
by 16-fold. Hence, a 100 dB(A) sound level limit combined with the use  
of hearing protection such as earplugs can further offer protection to 
those visiting venues at greater frequency or staying longer, totalling  
up to around 6 hours a week on average.
Choice of averaging time interval
Figure A2.1 below shows how the time-averaged, A-weighted sound 
level, LAeq evolves over the course of a typical live-music event when 
different averaging time intervals are used (1 minute, 5 minutes, or 60 
minutes). 
Figure A2.1: 
Evolution of time-averaged, A-weighted sound 
level: example for a live-music event
19:30
80
85
90
95
100
105
100
20:00
20:30
21:00
21:30
22:00
LAeq (dB)
LAeq, 1 min
LAeq, 15 min
LAeq, 60 min
Time
Main set
Encore
Warm-up act

=== página 83 ===
Annex 2
73
As a basis for monitoring and controlling the sound level during a live 
performance of a music band, the use of a 1-minute averaging time 
interval (LAeq, 1 min), would be problematic. The value of LAeq, 1 min fluctuates 
by 10 dB+ within a band’s set, and there are regular spikes in sound 
level as the crowd applauds between songs. It would not be practicable 
or appropriate for the sound engineer to be continually adjusting the 
output of the sound system in response to these fleeting changes in 
sound level.
The use of a 60-minute averaging time interval (LAeq, 60 min), which  
forms the basis of sound level regulations in some countries (5, 6),  
can also be problematic in practice. Due to the long averaging time,  
LAeq, 60 min tends to rise only gradually during a band’s set, never reaching 
a stable value. Similarly, LAeq, 60 min is slow to fall after a band has finished 
their set, meaning that when the next act comes on stage (typically 
after a break of around 20–30 minutes), the value of LAeq, 60 min  
remains influenced by the performance of the previous act. If each  
band uses their own sound engineer, this could cause friction, with 
sound engineers finding that their freedom is constrained by the 
decisions and actions of their predecessor (unless the measurement 
system is reset before the start of each set, leading to discontinuities  
in the sound level measurements).
The use of a 15-minute averaging time interval (LAeq, 15 min), as 
recommended in this WHO Global standard for safe listening  
venues and events, represents a pragmatic choice. It is sufficiently  
long to allow the natural dynamics (the highs and lows in intensity)  
of a musical performance to be preserved within a band’s set, while 
being short enough to provide sound engineers with the timely 
information they need to control the sound level effectively and 
independently between acts.
References
1.	
Environmental Noise Guidelines for the European Region. World 
Health Organization; 2018 (https://www.euro.who.int/en/health-
topics/environment-and-health/noise/environmental-noise-
guidelines-for-the-european-region, accessed 29 November 2021).
2.	
Neitzel RL, Fligor BJ. Risk of noise-induced hearing loss due to 
recreational sound: review and recommendations. J Acoust Soc Am. 
2019; 146(5):39113–921.

=== página 84 ===
74
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS
3.	
Safe listening devices and systems: a WHO-ITU standard. Geneva: 
World Health Organization and International Telecommunication 
Union, 2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/hand
le/10665/280085/9789241515276-eng.pdf, accessed  
29 November 2021).
4.	
Diviani N, Zanini C, Amann J, Chadha S, Cieza A, Rubinelli S. 
Awareness, attitudes, and beliefs about music-induced hearing loss: 
towards the development of a health communication strategy to 
promote safe listening. Patient Educ Couns. 2019; 102(8):1506–1512.
5.	
Beach EF, Cowan R, Mulder J, O’Brien I. Regulations to reduce risk of 
hearing damage in concert venues. Bull World Health Organ. 2020; 
98(5):367–369.
6.	
Beach EF, Mulder J, O’Brien I, Cowan R. Overview of laws and 
regulations aimed at protecting the hearing of patrons within 
entertainment venues. Eur J Public Health. 2020; 31(1):227–233. 

=== página 85 ===
75
Annex 3. 	 
Spectrum of live sound 
and types of sound level 
measurements 
A-weighting and the spectrum of live sound
A-weighting is the most widely used frequency weighting for sound 
level measurements. Established risk criteria for noise-induced hearing 
loss are based on A-weighted exposure limits. For this reason, the sound 
level limit is specified as an A-weighted level. 
A limitation of A-weighting is that it does not capture the entirety of the 
sound energy present in amplified music, nor does it reflect the way the 
human hearing system responds to intense sounds. Long-term sound 
level logging in music venues hosting pop, rock, and jazz concerts 
reveals the presence of prominent low-frequency (“bass”) energy in 
amplified live sound.
As can be seen in Figure A3.1, after the application of A-weighting, this 
low-frequency region is significantly down-weighted and so contributes 
little towards the overall sound level. A-weighted measurements thus 
do not inform much about the level of low-frequency sound energy to 
which an audience is exposed.

=== página 86 ===
76
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS
Figure A3.1: 
Discrepancy in low-frequency contribution with 
A-weighted sound-level measurements
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
16 kHz
8 kHz
4 kHz
2 kHz
1 kHz
500 Hz
250Hz
125Hz
63Hz
32Hz
16Hz
1/3-octave-band level (dB)
Low-frequency
energy not captured
with A-weighting
typical live-sound spectrum
...after A-weighting
...after C-weighting
An alternative frequency weighting, C-weighting, gives more weight 
to the low frequencies and is closer to the way that humans perceive 
sounds at high sound pressure levels. As can be seen in Figure A3.1, 
unlike A-weighting, C-weighting is able to capture the energy of live 
sound over the full audio bandwidth (20–20000 Hz). 
Fortunately, transmission of low frequency sound through the outer and 
middle ear is far less efficient than for sound in the mid-frequency range 
(250–4000 Hz) (2), hence low-frequency exposure is widely assumed 
to be less harmful to hearing. Nevertheless, it is yet to be proved that 
exposure to intense low-frequency sound does not cause hearing  
injury (3). 
Recognizing the potential risk posed by intense low-frequency exposure, 
the safe-listening regulations developed in some European countries, 
most notably France (4), include an additional time-averaged, sound 
level limit based on C-weighting, expressed as LCeq. 

=== página 87 ===
Annex 3
77
The WHO Global standard for safe-listening venues and events does not 
include a C-weighted sound level limit for the following reasons:
•	further research is needed to clarify the risk of intense low-frequency 
sound exposure to human hearing;
•	there is currently a lack of clear evidence on which to base a specific 
C-weighted sound level limit; and
•	obtaining reliable measurements of low-frequency sound levels can be 
challenging, particularly in small indoor venues.
Different types of sound level measurements
Figure A3.2 shows sound level data collected over the course of a 
professional performance at an outdoor festival in Germany . 
Figure A3.2: 
Different types of sound level measurements 
throughout a performance 
LAeq, 15 min
LAFmax
LCpeak
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1110
120
130
140
Sound level (dB)
Time (minutes)

=== página 88 ===
78
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS
Three separate traces are plotted in the figure, corresponding to 
different types of acoustic measurement:
1)	
LAeq, 15min — this is the A-weighted equivalent continuous sound 
level with a 15 minute averaging time interval, the same type of 
measurement used to define the sound level limit in this Standard. 
The sound level remains below 100 dB LAeq, 15min at all times  
(the limit that was in place for this particular event).1 
2)	
LAFmax – this is the maximum time-weighted sound level using 
A-weighting and “fast” time weighting (exponential time constant 
of 125 milliseconds). The LAFmax level fluctuates far more than  
the LAeq, and regularly approaches 110 dB LAFmax. 
3)	
LCpeak – this is the peak instantaneous sound level without any time 
weighting or averaging. The peak sound level is normally measured 
using the C- frequency weighting. Apart from during gaps between 
songs, the peak sound level routinely exceeds 130 dB LCpeak.2 
This example demonstrates that different types of sound level, while all 
measured in decibels, cannot be directly compared. When measuring, 
reporting, or interpreting sound levels, it is crucial to specify precisely the 
type of measurement under consideration, including any frequency or 
time weightings applied.
Setting up the sound limiter
Where the sound system is capable, in principle, of producing peak 
levels above 140 dB LCpeak, the output from the system should be 
controlled by a fast-acting electronic limiter to prevent peak levels above 
140 dB LCpeak. Ordinarily the operation of the sound limiter is set up in 
advance (e.g. during commissioning of the sound system or at sound 
check) to ensure that peak levels do not exceed 140 dB LCpeak at the 
most-exposed location in the audience area. Once appropriately set, 
the limiter is a reliable fail-safe last resort. Real-time monitoring of peak 
sound levels need not be undertaken: control of peak sound levels is 
considered a system-design feature, separate from the need for ongoing 
monitoring of the A-weighted sound level. 
1	 Note that even though the limit of 100 dB LAeq, 15 min was adhered to throughout, 
the sound dose received over the duration of this ~90 minute performance would 
have been equivalent to around 600% of the allowable daily noise dose under 
occupational noise regulations
2	 Note that the measurement microphone was positioned at the FOH mixing desk 
for all of these measurements; audience members in the front rows would have 
been exposed to considerably higher peak sound levels than shown.

=== página 89 ===
Annex 3
79
The purpose of the limiter is not to shut down or silence the music  
if the sound level becomes too high: its purpose is to protect against 
sudden extreme peaks by capping the the level at which these will  
be reproduced through the sound system.
References
1.	
Støfringsdal B. Expected sound levels at concert venues for 
amplified music. Auditorium Acoustics. Hamburg, Germany; 2018.
2.	
Ruggero MA, Temchin AN. The roles of the external, middle, and 
inner ears in determining the bandwidth of hearing. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 
2002; 99(20):13206–13210.
3.	
Wiggins IM, Liston K. Sound distribution for safe listening in 
entertainment venues: a review. Make Listening Safe. World Health 
Organization; September 2020 (https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/
default-source/documents/health-topics/deafness-and-hearing-
loss/monograph-on-sound-distribution-for-safe-listening-in-music-
venues.pdf?sfvrsn=c16f7a38_5, accessed 17 December 2021).
4.	
République Française. Décret no. 2017–1244 du 7 août 2017 relatif à la 
prévention des risques liés aux bruits et aux sons amplifiés (Decree 
no. 2017–1244 of 7 August 2017 relating to the prevention of risks 
linked to amplified noise and sound). Légifrance; 2017.
5. 	
Hill AJ, Burton J. A case study on the impact live event sound 
level regulations have on sound engineering practice, Institute of 
Acoustics; 2002.
6. 	 Commission IE. IEC 61672-1:2013 Electroacoustics. Sound level 
meters – Part 1: Specifications; 2013.
7. 	
Commission IE. IEC 61672-3:2013 Electroacoustics. Sound level 
meters – Periodic tests; 2013.

=== página 90 ===
Annex 4. 	 
The importance  
of calibration 
Sound level meters, and especially measurement microphones, are 
delicate pieces of equipment that are easily damaged if mishandled. 
Furthermore, even fully functioning devices are sensitive to changes in 
environmental conditions including temperature and humidity. Many 
venues present a hostile environment for precision measurement 
equipment, in which devices may be subject to physical knocks and 
changes in temperature or humidity over the course of an event. 
Regardless of the quality or expense of a sound level meter, the only 
way to know that it is giving accurate readings is to subject it to a 
known sound pressure level and verify that it reports the correct level 
(1). If necessary, small adjustments may be made to the sensitivity of 
the meter so that it reports the correct value. This process is known as 
calibration. International standards for the measurement of sound levels 
ordinarily require that the calibration of the sound level meter is verified 
immediately before and after every set of measurements (2).
Calibration can be verified using an acoustic 
field calibrator – a small, battery-powered device 
that generates a tone at a known frequency and 
sound pressure level (SPL) (usually a 1 kHz tone  
at 94 dB SPL or 114 dB SPL). 
 
The measurement microphone is inserted into 
the calibrator, and the reading displayed on the 
sound level meter is then checked to verify that 
it matches the expected sound level within an 
acceptable tolerance (e.g. ≤+/-0.2 dB). Regular 
calibration before and after each event is the 
best way to monitor for any signs of damage to 
the measurement equipment and/or 
unexplained drift in the measurements over 
time. Any such issues should be investigated 
promptly to determine their cause.
Image courtesy of  
Marcel Kok, dBControl.
Image courtesy of  
Marcel Kok, dBControl.
80

=== página 91 ===
Annex 4
81
The highest level of accuracy can be ensured by checking the calibration 
immediately before and after every event, maintaining records of the 
calibration results, and investigating the cause of any drift of more 
than ±0.2 dB between consecutive calibration events. However, a more 
relaxed calibration schedule (for example, weekly or monthly calibration 
checks with a tolerance of ±1 dB) might be considered adequate for 
long-term sound level monitoring in venues. 
The calibrator must itself be checked from time to time to ensure that 
it is generating the correct sound pressure level. This is usually achieved 
by sending the calibrator to an approved laboratory for calibration using 
specialist equipment.
References
1.	
Mulder J, McGinnity S. Sound level measurement, monitoring, 
management, and documentation in music venues. Make 
Listening Safe. World Health Organization; May 2020 (https://
cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-source/documents/health-
topics/deafness-and-hearing-loss/monograph-on-sound-level-
measurement-management-and-documentation-in-music-venues.
pdf?sfvrsn=69990849_5, accessed 29 November 2021). 
2.	
ISO 1996-2:2017. Acoustics – Description, measurement and 
assessment of environmental noise – Part 2: Determination of sound 
pressure levels. International Standardization Organization; 2017.

=== página 92 ===
82
Annex 5. 	 
Location of sound  
level measurement 
Determination of the reference measurement position
The sound level limit applies at the reference measurement position, 
which must be determined in advance for each venue or event. 
Different approaches to determining the reference measurement 
position are possible. The greatest protection of audience hearing is 
achieved by identifying as the reference measurement position the 
location within the audience area at which the sound level is at its 
highest (typically directly in front of the main loudspeakers). This ensures 
that all audience members experience a sound level no higher than 
the sound level limit, regardless of where they are seated or standing. 
However, this approach may be infeasible in smaller venues and/or those 
that cannot afford to invest in a high-end sound system. 
An alternative, and broadly applicable approach, is to identify as the 
reference measurement position a location at which the sound level is 
representative of that to which a majority of the audience is exposed 
(accepting that individuals choosing to stand close to the stage or 
loudspeakers may experience a higher sound level). For this purpose, it 
is appropriate to identify the reference measurement position as being 
at the centre of the “core audience area.” The core audience area is the 
primary area that would ordinarily be occupied by audience members 
actively attending to the music (e.g. the area in front of the stage, or the 
main dancefloor). It extends from the front row to the rear of the area 
ordinarily occupied by audience members (or, for venues with a balcony, 
from the front row to the front edge of the balcony). Example scenarios 
for measurement locations included in the following section assume 
application of this approach.
Use of an alternative long-term measurement position
It is often not practicable to measure the sound level directly at the 
reference measurement position. In such cases, it is necessary to 
measure the sound level elsewhere (at a “long-term measurement 
position”), and, where necessary, apply a correction to 

=== página 93 ===
Annex 5
83
the measured values. No correction is needed if the long-term 
measurement position is:
i)		
within the central 1/3rd of the core audience area across  
its width and depth;
and
ii)	
no more than 70 metres from the front row of the audience.
This is due to evidence generated through research conducted for the 
Government of the Netherlands (1). The evidence indicates that, across 
a variety of venues of different types and sizes, the sound level within 
this central region will typically deviate from that at the reference 
measurement position by no more than ±1.5 dB(A). If the long-term 
measurement position falls outside of the prescribed area around the 
centre of the core audience area, a correction must be determined 
following the procedure described in Annex 6. Figures A5.1, A5.2, 
and A5.3 describe possible scenarios with appropriate measurement 
positions.
Figure A5.1: 
Scenario A
Stage
1/3
1/3
50m
1/3
1/3
1/3
1/3
RMP
LMP
FOH
RMP = Reference Measurement Position
LMP = Long-term Measurement Position
 = Core audience area
Scenario A depicts an outdoor festival stage. The reference 
measurement position, at the centre of the core audience area, 
lies within the crowd. It is not practicable to place a measurement 
microphone here, and so the sound level is instead measured at the 
FOH mixing desk (the long-term measurement position).
The long-term measurement position at FOH lies within the central third 
of the core audience area (in both width and depth) and is less than 70 
metres from the front row of the audience. The sound level measured 
at the long-term measurement position is therefore considered 
representative of that occurring at the reference measurement position, 
and no correction is needed.

=== página 94 ===
84
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS
Figure A5.2: 
Scenario B
Stage
Balcony
1/3
1/3
1/3
1/3
1/3
1/3
RMP
LMP
FOH
RMP = Reference Measurement Position
LMP = Long-term Measurement Position
 = Core audience area
Scenario B depicts an indoor concert venue. There is a balcony at the 
rear of the venue, and the FOH mixing desk is located at the front of the 
balcony, overlooking the stage. 
The core audience area covers the area at main floor level between 
the front row of the audience and the front edge of the balcony. The 
reference measurement position is in the centre of the core audience 
area.
For reasons of practicality, FOH is again used as the long-term 
measurement position. In this venue, the long-term measurement 
position does not lie within the prescribed area around the reference 
measurement position. A correction must therefore be applied to the 
sound level measured at FOH to estimate the sound level occurring at 
the reference measurement position (see Annex 6). 
Figure A5.3: 
Scenario C
Danceﬂoor
Bar
RMP
LMP
RMP = Reference Measurement Position
LMP = Long-term Measurement Position
 = Core audience area

=== página 95 ===
Annex 5
85
Scenario C depicts a nightclub with a sunken dancefloor. The sound 
system comprises ceiling-hung loudspeakers to achieve an even 
distribution of sound and to prevent anyone getting too close to  
a loudspeaker. 
With this scenario, there is no stage in the venue: the core audience 
area corresponds to the main dancefloor. The reference measurement 
position is at audience head height in the centre of the dancefloor.
To keep the measurement microphone safe from damage, it is 
suspended from the ceiling, above the dance floor. Because the 
long-term measurement position is at an elevated height, with 
the loudspeakers directed downwards towards the dancefloor, the 
sound level may be different at the long-term measurement position 
compared with the reference measurement position. A correction  
is therefore required (see Annex 6). 
Display of sound level measurement with correction
Where a correction is required, it should be applied automatically  
so that the sound level displayed to the responsible actor directly 
corresponds to that at the reference measurement position. 
Where this is not possible, an alternative is to adjust the sound level 
limit by an amount equal to the correction. For example, if the required 
correction is +5 dB(A), and the uncorrected sound level is displayed, the 
responsible actor will then need to work to an effective sound level limit 
of 95 dB LAeq, 15min. In such cases, the effective sound level limit should  
be prominently displayed next to the sound level display.
References
1.	
Measurement protocol for noise covenant in the Netherlands; 2019 
(https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2020/03/20/
meetprotocol-convenant-geluid-nederland-2019, accessed 17 
December 2021).

=== página 96 ===
86
Annex 6. 	 
Procedure for 
determining the required 
correction for sound 
measurement 
Where the long-term measurement position is different from the 
reference measurement position (see Annex 5), the required correction 
can be determined as follows. 
The process should be undertaken when the venue is unoccupied  
and at a time when ambient noise levels are low enough to not interfere 
with the measurements.
All measurements should be made with a duration of at least  
30 seconds.
i)		
Set up the measurement microphone or a self-contained  
sound level meter at the reference measurement position.
ii)	
Play a suitable test signal through the sound system at a 
moderately high sound level (according to whether following 
Variation A or Variation B – see below).
iii)	
Take a measurement of the time-averaged sound level at the 
reference measurement position (Leq, ref).
iv)	
Move the measurement microphone or self-contained sound level 
meter to the long-term measurement position.
v)	
Restart or continue to play the test signal through the sound 
system, taking care to ensure that its level at source has not been 
changed in any way.
vi)	
Take a measurement of the sound level at the long-term 
measurement position (Leq, long-term).
vii)	
Calculate the required correction as the difference in sound level 
between the reference measurement position and the long-term 
measurement position (Leq, ref – Leq, long-term).

=== página 97 ===
Annex 6
87
There are two variations of the method:
1.	
Variation A – frequency-specific method (preferred)
•	Using this method, the required correction (Leq, ref – Leq, long-term)  
is calculated separately for each frequency band.
•	The calculation may be performed in either octave bands or 1/3-octave 
bands with centre frequencies spanning, as a minimum, the range 
from 63 Hz to 16 kHz.
•	Frequency-band-specific levels should be measured with linear 
frequency weighting.
•	The recommended test signal when using Variation A is broadband 
pink noise. 
•	This method is suitable only when the sound level measurement 
system includes a feature to automatically apply the correction on  
a frequency-band-specific basis.
•	The advantage of this method is that it continually accounts for 
variation in the frequency spectrum of the sound being reproduced 
through the sound system.
2.	
Variation B – broadband method
•	Using this method, the required correction (Leq, ref – Leq, long-term)  
is calculated as a single, broadband value.
•	The sound levels at the reference measurement position and the 
long-term measurement position should be measured as broadband, 
A-weighted levels.
•	The recommended test signal when using Variation B is broadband 
brown noise, as this type of signal has a frequency spectrum that 
approximates real musical material.
A limitation of this approach (common to Variations A and B) is that 
it does not account for the spillage of sound from the stage into the 
audience area that may occur during a live performance; only the  
sound level produced by the sound system is corrected.

=== página 98 ===
88
Annex 7. 	 
Suitable reverberation 
times for amplified 
music and acoustic 
treatment 
Suitable reverberation times for amplified music (1)
Amplified music generally sounds best in venues with well-damped 
room reverberation, i.e. a “dry” acoustic character. At the same time, 
venues should not aim for an excessively short reverberation time, as an 
acoustically “dead” venue tends to result in unsatisfactory conditions for 
the musicians. A balance is therefore needed.
Building on extensive research conducted by Niels Werner Adelman-
Larsen, summarized in his book, Rock and pop venues: acoustic and 
architectural design (2), Norwegian standard NS 8178:2014 recommends 
reverberation time (RT60) design targets for performance halls for 
amplified music (3). 
Recommended mid-frequency reverberation times are given as 
a function of room volume. These relate to the reverberation time 
measured in a furnished, but unoccupied, venue. Upper and lower limits 
for the acceptable reverberation time are provided, indicated by the 
shaded region in Figure A7.1 below. 

=== página 99 ===
Annex 7
89
Figure A7.1: 
Recommended mid-frequency reverberation times* 
for venues for amplified music, as a function of 
room volume 
1,2
1,0
0,8
0,6
0,4
0,2
0,0
10
100
1000
10000
Volume, V (m3)
Reverberation time (s)
*	 mean RT60 across the 500 Hz and 1 kHz octave bands.
Good sound quality in a venue for amplified music depends not only 
on the overall level of reverberation being adequately controlled, but 
also on the reverberation time being reasonably equal in all frequency 
bands. Control of reverberation in the 125 Hz octave band is especially 
important to allow sound engineers to achieve a clear and controlled mix 
(4). Norwegian standard NS 8178:2014 therefore also gives recommended 
tolerances for RT60 in octave bands from 63 Hz to 4 kHz, expressed as a 
ratio of RT60 in each octave band to the mid-frequency RT60 (average 
RT60 across the 500 Hz and 1 kHz octave bands – see Figure A7.2) (3).

=== página 100 ===
90
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS
Figure A7.2: 
Recommended tolerances for reverberation time* 
at different octave bands for venues for amplified 
music 
1,5
1,4
1,3
1,2
1,1
1,0
0,9
0,8
0,7
0,6
0,5
63
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
Factor T/Tm
Frequency, f (Hz)
*	 T expressed as a ratio to the mid-frequency reverberation time Tm (mean RT60 
across the 500 Hz and 1 kHz octave bands). 
These recommendations apply to venues that are dedicated to hosting 
amplified-music events, such as rock/pop concerts or club nights. Since 
longer reverberation times are generally required for acoustic music 
(such as orchestral or choral performances), multipurpose venues that 
host both amplified and unamplified events are advised to explore 
options for variable acoustics. This could involve, for example, retractable 
curtains, or rotatable panels that can present either a sound absorbing 
or sound reflecting surface, allowing the acoustics to be tailored to the 
needs of a specific event. 

=== página 101 ===
Annex 7
91
Acoustic treatment of a venue
The acoustics of a venue can be modified by introducing new materials 
or surface finishes. There are different types of acoustic treatment, 
designed to achieve different goals. 
Sound absorption
Sound absorbers remove sound energy from the air when a sound wave 
impinges on them. Sound absorption is mainly used to control room 
reverberation or to reduce the strength of sound reflecting off a surface. 
Different approaches are needed to absorb sound in different frequency 
ranges. Most soft materials, for example, soft furnishings, curtains and 
drapes, and dedicated acoustic panels made of material such as mineral 
wool, naturally absorb sound at mid-to-high frequencies. Absorbing 
sound at low frequencies is more challenging and relies on the use of 
thicker absorbers and/or damped resonant systems. Examples of these 
include Helmholtz and membrane resonant absorbers, and inflatable 
absorbers. Figure A7.3 provides a visual representation of the absorption 
properties of different objects as described above.
In some cases, it may be possible to incorporate low-frequency 
absorption without reducing available space in the venue. For example: 
•	In a venue with perimeter seating, the volume under the benches 
could be converted to act as a resonant absorber. 
•	A suspended ceiling can also provide effective low-frequency 
absorption, if it is mounted at least 30 cm below the structural ceiling 
and has a layer of sound-absorbing material (e.g. mineral wool) overlaid 
atop the tiles within the ceiling void. 

=== página 102 ===
Image examples above courtesy of: Stil Acoustics, t.akustic, 
Ecophon, RPG Acoustical Systems, and Flex Acoustics.  
Inflatable absorbers from Flex Acoustics created and patented  
by Niels W Alderman-Larsen.
92
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS
Figure A7.3: 
Absorption properties of different objects 
Frequency (Hz)
Absorbtion coefﬁcients*
0
63
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
63
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
63
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
63
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
63
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
63
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
20 mm acoustic tiles (200 mm o.d.s.)
20 mm tiles + 50 mm mineral ﬁbre 
(200 mm o.d.s.)
20 mm acoustic tiles (60 mm o.d.s.)
Mineral wool/foam (100 mm)
Mineral wool/foam 
(50 mm, 300 mm from wall)
Mineral wool/foam (50 mm)
Mineral wool/foam (25 mm)
Perforated/slotted board 
(70 mm void with 50 mm insulation)
Perforated/slotted board 
(20 mm void with 20 mm insulation)
Damped membrane absorber
Inﬂated (”On”)
Uninﬂated (”Off”)
Accoustic spray (25 mm)
Accoustic spray (15 mm)
Accoustic spray (35 mm)
Heavy curtains (draped)
Heavy curtains 
(hung straight)
Soft seating
Audience
•  Curtains/drapes
•  Soft furnishings
•  Audience members
•  Acoustic spray
 (spray ﬁnish for 
 walls/ceiling)
• Sound absorbing panels
 (open-cell acoustic foam 
 or fabric-wrapped 
 mineral wool)
•  Acoustic ceiling tiles
   (suspended below structural
   ceiling; optional extra 
   mineral-wool absorbtion 
 in ceiling void)
• Perforated/slotted 
 sheet absorber
  (perforated or slotted board 
 with mineral-wool insulation 
 behind; may be integrated 
 into bench seating)
•  Damped membrane 
 absorber (heavily damped 
 resonant metal plate)
•  Inﬂatable low-frequency 
 absorbers (for variable 
 acoustics in multi-purpose 
 venues)
High-frequency absorbtion
Low-frequency absorbtion
©Ecophon

=== página 103 ===
Sound diffusion
Sound diffusers are surfaces or objects designed to reflect sound in 
many different directions. Sound diffusion is used to spread sound 
energy as evenly as possible or to deal with problematic reflections.  
This can be through use of:
•	Convex reflecting surfaces
•	Surfaces with varying depth profile
•	A patchwork arrangement of absorbing/reflecting surfaces.
Images courtesy of  
RPG Acoustical Systems.
Annex 7
93

=== página 104 ===
Safety
When introducing any form of acoustic treatment into a venue, it is 
crucial to ensure that all materials meet appropriate standards for fire 
resistance/retardancy and will not release carcinogenic or otherwise 
toxic fibrous particles into the air. 
References
1.	
Wiggins IM, Liston K. Sound distribution for safe listening in 
entertainment venues: a review. Make Listening Safe. World Health 
Organization; September 2020 (https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/
default-source/documents/health-topics/deafness-and-hearing-
loss/monograph-on-sound-distribution-for-safe-listening-in-music-
venues.pdf?sfvrsn=c16f7a38_5, accessed 29 November 2021).
2.	
Adelman-Larsen NW. Rock and pop venues: acoustic and 
architectural design. Berlin, Germany: Springer; 2014.
3.	
Rindell, JH. New Norwegian standard on the acoustics of rooms for 
music rehearsal and performance. Forum Akousikum. 2014 (https://
www.odeon.dk/pdf/RehearsalRooms_ForumAcusticum2014_Rindel.
pdf, accessed 17 December 2021).
4.	
Adelman-Larsen NW, Thompson ER. The importance of bass clarity 
in pop and rock venues. J Acoust Soc Amer. 2008; 123:3090.
94
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 105 ===
95
Annex 8. 	 
Low-frequency  
acoustic issues 
Low-frequency acoustic issues have limited direct influence on the 
A-weighted sound level because of the relative insensitivity of the 
A-weighting curve to low frequencies (see Annex 3). However, good 
acoustic control of the low-frequency range, especially in the 125 Hz 
octave band, is critical to the sound quality of amplified music (1). In part, 
this is due to a phenomenon called the upward spread of masking (2),  
in which lower frequency sounds have a more pronounced effect on  
the ability to hear higher frequency sounds than vice versa. It is 
important to deal with any low-frequency acoustic issues in a venue 
so that sound engineers can achieve a clear and impactful mix at a 
controllable sound level. 
Room modes can be a cause of low-frequency problems in small  
indoor venues with a volume less than around 1000 m3 (3–6).
Room modes (7) occur at frequencies where the distance sound 
travels between opposing surfaces of the room is an exact multiple 
of half a wavelength. At these frequencies, sound bouncing back and 
forth between the surfaces undergoes systematic constructive and 
destructive interference, setting up a “standing wave” pattern. The result 
is alternating regions of high and low sound pressure throughout the 
room, as depicted in Figure A8.1.

=== página 106 ===
96
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS
Figure A8.1: 
Example illustration of a room mode 
Sound pressure
If the low-frequency (bass) response seems very uneven or “boomy” 
when moving around a small venue, this may indicate an issue with 
room modes. The introduction of more low-frequency sound absorption 
is generally required (see Annex 7).
Room modes are generally not a problem in mid- and large-sized 
venues; in these settings many room modes overlap at a given 
frequency, causing an averaging of the fluctuations and resulting  
in a more spatially uniform sound field. 
Coherent interference and the “power alley” effect (7)
A different type of low-frequency issue, which can arise in indoor or 
outdoor venues of any size, results from coherent interference between 
direct and/or reflected sound from one or more loudspeakers. 
For example, in the common case of a spaced left–right pair of 
subwoofers placed on either side of the stage, coherent interference 
between the loudspeakers can result in a channel of increased low-
frequency sound energy running down the centre of the audience area 
(known colloquially as the “power alley”). Members of the audience may 
experience a very different balance between low and high frequencies, 
depending on whether they are standing inside or outside of the power 
alley (see Figure A8.2). 

=== página 107 ===
Annex 8
97
Physical and electronic approaches can be taken to reduce coherent 
interference between loudspeakers (8).
Figure A8.2: 
Example illustration of the low-frequency  
“power alley” effect 
Stage
The
“power alley”
90
100
110
120
Sound pressure level (dBZ)

=== página 108 ===
98
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS
References
1.	
Adelman-Larsen NW, Thompson ER. The importance of bass clarity 
in pop and rock venues. J Acoust Soc Amer. 2008; 123:3090.
2.	
Wegel RL, Lane CE. The auditory masking of one pure tone by 
another and its probable relation to the dynamics of the inner ear. 
Phys Rev. 1924; 23(2):266–285.
3.	
Adelman-Larsen NW. Rock and pop venues: acoustic and 
architectural design. Berlin, Germany: Springer; 2014.
4.	
Adelman-Larsen NW, Thompson ER, Gade AC. Suitable 
reverberation times for halls for rock and pop music. J Acoust Soc 
Am. 2010; 127:247–255.
5.	
Adelman-Larsen NW, Gade AC, Thompson ER. The flexible bass 
absorber. AES Convention Papers Forum. AES Convention 123. Audio 
Engineering Society. Vienna, Austria; 2007.
6.	
Everest FA, Pohlmann KC. Master handbook of acoustics, 6th ed. 
McGraw-Hill Education – Europe; 2015.
7.	
Wiggins IM, Liston K. Sound distribution for safe listening in 
entertainment venues: a review. Make Listening Safe. World Health 
Organization; September 2020 (https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/
default-source/documents/health-topics/deafness-and-hearing-
loss/monograph-on-sound-distribution-for-safe-listening-in-music-
venues.pdf?sfvrsn=c16f7a38_5, accessed 29 November 2021).
8.	
Hill AJ, Moore JB. Dynamic diffuse signal processing for sound 
reinforcement and reproduction. J Audio Eng Soc. 2018;66(11):953–
965. 

=== página 109 ===
99
Annex 9. 	 
Sound distribution  
for safe listening 
Loudspeaker positioning
In order to achieve a reasonably uniform distribution of sound  
across the audience area, it is fundamental to avoid a situation where 
some audience members are much closer to the loudspeakers than 
others (1). This is because the level of the direct sound decreases with 
distance from the loudspeakers, falling off at a rate of up to 6 dB for 
every doubling of distance. 
Figure A9.1 illustrates three scenarios. Scenario A depicts a worst-case, 
yet commonly seen, arrangement, in which the loudspeakers are 
stacked on the floor (or on the front of the stage) with nothing to stop 
audience members from approaching them. Listeners at the front of 
the audience are many times closer to the loudspeakers than those 
at the rear. Sound from the loudspeakers will also be partially blocked 
from reaching the rear of the audience by the people standing in front. 
The result is that audience members at the front are dangerously over-
exposed, while those at the rear may struggle to hear the music clearly. 
Figure A9.1: 
Positioning of loudspeakers and the effect  
on sound distribution
Scenario A
Scenario B
Scenario C
Sound level LAeq (dB)
90
95
100
105
110

=== página 110 ===
100
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS
Scenarios B and C show two ways in which the situation can be 
improved. If the venue has sufficient ceiling height, the loudspeakers 
can be elevated (“flown”) by hanging them from the ceiling (Scenario 
B). The listener-to-loudspeaker distance is thus more equal across the 
audience area, and everyone has a clear line of sight to the loudspeakers. 
The result is a safe and satisfactory sound level for all audience 
members, regardless of location.
Scenario C shows an arrangement that can be used to good effect in 
venues with a more limited ceiling height (2). The main loudspeakers 
are again suspended from the ceiling, but at a lower height than in 
Scenario B. The delivery of sound to the rear half of the audience area is 
supported by a set of (smaller and less powerful) delay-fill loudspeakers. 
The signal sent to these loudspeakers is electronically or digitally delayed 
so that the sound from them arrives in synchrony with, or very slightly 
later than, the sound from the main loudspeakers at the front. This 
creates the perceptual impression that the sound originated from the 
band on stage, and not from a set of loudspeakers mounted midway 
over the audience area. 
Placement of subwoofers
Subwoofers are loudspeakers that are dedicated to reproducing low-
frequency sound below approximately 100 Hz. There is currently no 
clear evidence to suggest that such low-frequency sound is harmful 
to human hearing. However, flying the subwoofers above head height 
can lead to a more uniform distribution of low-frequency sound from 
front to back of an audience (3). This may not always be possible due 
to limitations of a venue’s ceiling height and/or load-bearing capacity. 
However, it is preferable to fly the subwoofers where possible, pending 
a better understanding of the risk that low-frequency sound exposure 
poses to hearing.
The positioning of the subwoofers will generally have only a  
limited direct effect on A-weighted sound levels at the reference 
measurement position, and therefore on the ability to comply with  
the 100 dB LAeq, 15min sound level limit. It may, however, dictate the  
overall level of low-frequency sound that can be produced by the  
sound system without causing audience members in the front rows  
to be exposed to peak levels above 140 dB LCpeak (see F1.3.3).
Loudspeaker directivity
Loudspeakers do not emit sound equally in all directions, particularly 
at mid and high frequencies, where most sound-reinforcement 
loudspeakers are designed to project sound over a defined coverage 
angle (e.g. 90 ° horizontal x 60 ° vertical). 

=== página 111 ===
Annex 9
101
The benefits of directing loudspeakers are to: 
i)		
focus sound where it is wanted (e.g. on the audience, not on the 
walls and ceiling);
ii)	
minimize sound interference between loudspeakers (e.g. when 
multiple loudspeakers are used, each providing coverage to a 
specific part of the audience area);
iii)	
help to compensate for the natural attenuation of sound level with 
distance (e.g. by pointing an elevated loudspeaker towards the 
rear of the audience area, the fact that audience members at the 
front are closer to the loudspeaker is offset by the fact that it is not 
pointing directly at them, resulting in a more even sound level at 
front and back of the audience). 
In professional sound-reinforcement applications, the use of a 
loudspeaker configuration known as a “line array” is now widespread at 
larger venues and events (Figure A9.2). A line array comprises multiple 
individual loudspeaker units hung adjacent to one another in a vertical 
(sometimes curved) line. With careful design and setup, a line array can 
achieve a wide coverage in the horizontal plane along with a narrow and 
well-directed coverage in the vertical plane; this makes it effective for 
uniform delivery of sound from front to back of a large audience area. 
Figure A9.2: 
Visual representation of sound distribution  
with a line array loudspeaker configuration

=== página 112 ===
102
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS
References
1.	
McCarthy J, Mulder K, Neervoort K, Shabalina E, Wardle A. Technical 
Document AESTD1007.1.20-05: Understanding and managing sound 
exposure and noise pollution at outdoor events. Audio Engineering 
Society; New York, USA; 2020.
2.	
Sandell J, Berntson A, Sjösten P, Blomgren G, Kähäri K. Acoustic 
intervention in a live music club. Acta Acustica united with Acustica. 
2007; 93(5):843–849.
3.	
Corteel E, Coste-Dombre H, Combet C, Horyn Y, Montignies 
F. On the efficiency of flown vs. ground-stacked subwoofer 
configurations. 145th Convention of the Audio Engineering Society; 
New York, USA; 2018.

=== página 113 ===
103
Annex 10. 	 
Sound levels close  
to loudspeakers 
Sound levels increase rapidly when approaching a loudspeaker, making 
the location immediately in front of the loudspeakers especially 
hazardous (1). 
Figure A10.1 below shows the results of a series of measurements 
undertaken in Metronome, a purpose-built live music venue in 
Nottingham, England, to understand how A-weighted sound levels vary 
close to loudspeakers (2). 
Figure A10.1: 
Direct sound levels close to point source and line 
array loudspeakers 
 
In each plot, the red lines correspond to sound levels received at 
the right ear (when faced towards the loudspeaker) of an acoustic 
mannequin, while black lines correspond to sound levels at the (less-
exposed) left ear. The dashed lines show predictions from a simple 
hypothetical model based on a 6 dB increase in level for each halving  
of the distance between listener and loudspeaker.
30 cm
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
1 m
2 m 3 m
30 cm
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
1 m
2 m 3 m
Direct sound level (dBA)
Distance
“Point source” loudspeaker
Direct sound level (dBA)
Distance
“Line array” loudspeaker

=== página 114 ===
104
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS
The rate at which sound levels increase differs depending on the 
type of loudspeaker; nonetheless, regardless of these differences, the 
sound level always rises significantly when approaching close to the 
loudspeaker, especially at distances less than 1 metre.
Sound levels at 30 centimetres distance from a loudspeaker were found 
to be as much as 17 dB(A) higher than at 3 metres. This corresponds to 
a 46-fold reduction in the effective “safe listening” time between these 
locations (e.g. spending 4 hours at 3 metres distance from a loudspeaker 
is equivalent to spending only 5 minutes at 30 centimetres). This 
highlights the importance of keeping audience members at a distance 
from loudspeakers wherever practicable.
References
1.	
Wiggins IM, Liston K. Sound distribution for safe listening in 
entertainment venues: a review. Make Listening Safe. World Health 
Organization; September 2020 (https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/
default-source/documents/health-topics/deafness-and-hearing-
loss/monograph-on-sound-distribution-for-safe-listening-in-music-
venues.pdf?sfvrsn=c16f7a38_5, accessed 29 November 2021).
2.	
Wiggins IM, Liston KI. Sound pressure levels in close proximity  
to sound-reinforcement loudspeakers. Proceedings of the Institute 
of Acoustics. Vol. 43. Pt. 1. 2021.

=== página 115 ===
105
Annex 11. 	 
Reducing on-stage 
sound levels
Suggestions to control on-stage sound levels are presented below (1). 
This is not an exhaustive list. Some are low-cost solutions accessible 
to venues and events of all types (e.g. dampening of acoustic drums, 
elevation of floor monitors). Others, however, may involve significant 
costs, impinge on artistic integrity, and/or require training and 
acclimatization for musicians to accept them (for example, in the case of 
in-ear monitoring). Not all measures will be suitable for use in all types of 
venue or event.
i)	
Acoustic drum kits
Sound levels from an acoustic drum kit (typically the loudest instrument 
on stage) can be reduced by dampening drums and cymbals using 
tape, towels, or a variety of proprietary drum-dampening products. The 
bass(/kick) drum can be dampened by stuffing the cavity with cushions, 
pillows, sheets, blankets, or other soft material, as if often required to 
achieve a robust reinforced kick-drum sound (2). In limited cases, it may 
be possible to replace an acoustic drum kit with an electronic one, the 
sound level from which is more easily managed. 
ii)	
Backline amplifiers
A power attenuator can be used in line between a guitar amplifier and 
its loudspeaker cabinet to get the “high-volume sound” at a lower sound 
pressure level. Speaker cabinets can sometimes be “mic’d up” in an 
off-stage location (e.g. under a raised stage). In limited cases, it may be 
possible to remove amplifiers altogether and replace them with a direct-
injection box or amplifier simulator. 
iii)	
Stage monitors
The use of a high-quality and well-maintained stage monitoring system 
can help musicians hear themselves clearly without needing to resort to 
excessive levels. 

=== página 116 ===
Elevating floor monitors (e.g. by placing them on drinks crates), or 
moving them closer to the performers, allows the same sound level to 
be achieved at the performers’ ears with a lower output level from the 
loudspeaker. The use of a bass shaker (a device that allows a drummer to 
monitor his or her own performance via vibration) can reduce the need 
for high-intensity acoustic monitoring via a drum-fill. In limited cases, 
it may be possible to replace stage monitors with in-ear monitoring for 
the performers. 
Once loud on-stage sources have been quietened as much as possible, 
the next step is to reduce the amount of sound that propagates from 
the stage to the audience area. The following steps may be considered:
i)		
Angle backline amplifiers so that they project sound away from 
the audience.
ii)	
Block direct sound from backline amplifiers from reaching the 
audience by placing a sturdy, upright wooden board lined with 
sound-absorbing material (e.g. open-cell foam or a mineral-wool 
slab) in front of the amplifier. 
“Old amp” (https://skfb.ly/onSEH) by pibanezl is licensed under Creative Commons 
Attribution. “Microphone” (https://skfb.ly/onKFL) by Helindu is licensed under Creative 
Commons Attribution. “Beer crate” (https://skfb.ly/6WvCn) by 3DDomino is licensed 
under Creative Commons Attribution. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
106
WHO GLOBAL STANDARD FOR SAFE LISTENING VENUES AND EVENTS

=== página 117 ===
iii)	
Block direct sound from a drum kit, or other loud acoustic 
instrument, using a clear screen made of acrylic or polycarbonate 
(the screen should ideally extend around the sides of the 
instrument, and the rear wall behind should be treated with 
sound-absorbing material to reduce reflected sound).  
All of the above-mentioned measures require the cooperation and 
consent of the performers, technicians and sound engineers. 
References
1.	
Wiggins IM, Liston K. Sound distribution for safe listening in 
entertainment venues: a review. Make Listening Safe. World Health 
Organization; September 2020 (https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/
default-source/documents/health-topics/deafness-and-hearing-
loss/monograph-on-sound-distribution-for-safe-listening-in-music-
venues.pdf?sfvrsn=c16f7a38_5, accessed 17 December 2021).
2.	
Hill A, Hawksford M, Rosenthal A, Gland G. Kick-drum signal 
acquisition, isolation, and reinforcement optimization in live sound. 
Audio Engineering Society convention paper 8357. 2011;13–16 (https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/228410182_Kick-Drum_Signal_
Acquisition_Isolation_and_Reinforcement_Optimization_in_Live_
Sound, accessed 17 December 2021).
Image courtesy of  
www.gear4music.com/ 
(WHD Drum Shield).
Annex 11
107

=== página 118 ===

=== página 119 ===

=== página 120 ===
World Health Organization 
20 Avenue Appia 
1211 Geneva 27 
Switzerland
website: www.who.int/initiatives/behealthy 
e-mail: bhbm@who.in
