=== página 1 ===
367
Bull World Health Organ 2020;98:367–369 | doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2471/BLT.19.242404
Perspectives
In 2015, the World Health Organization 
(WHO) convened a group of research-
ers and industry experts to tackle the 
risk of noise-induced hearing loss from 
loud music exposure because of personal 
listening devices and entertainment ven-
ues. The Make Listening Safe initiative 
has recently turned its attention to regu-
latory processes aimed at the protection 
of hearing at music venues. WHO esti-
mates that 1.1 billion young people are at 
risk from recreational sound exposure, 
with attendees at concerts, nightclubs 
and bars exposed to sound levels that 
regularly exceed a continuous equivalent 
sound level of 100 dB.1 This degree of 
exposure puts regular attendees at risk 
of developing disabling hearing loss and 
permanent tinnitus. These conditions 
adversely affect an individual’s ability 
to communicate, leading to social isola-
tion and poor educational and employ-
ment outcomes. Such outcomes have a 
significant impact at the individual and 
societal level.2
Although some European juris-
dictions have introduced regulations, 
laws or standards to address the risk 
of hearing damage from music venues, 
most countries have not done so.3 In 
this paper, we outline several issues 
that need to be considered when con-
sidering implementation of a regulatory 
framework for music venues. Obviously, 
new regulations will need to respect 
existing regulations that also deal with 
sound levels and licensing of venues. 
Enforcement of regulations and the cost 
of compliance are key considerations 
that will impact on the implementation 
of regulations by authorities and venue 
managers. Finally, education, train-
ing and awareness-raising will likely 
be integral to ensuring the successful 
implementation of regulations.
It is important to consider how new 
regulations for protection of patrons’ 
hearing at entertainment venues fit 
within the existing regulatory frame-
work within which venues operate. For 
example, in most jurisdictions, there 
are workplace health and safety laws 
that govern sound exposure for workers 
and there are upper sound-level limits 
set down by environmental law. In addi-
tion, venues are often subject to licens-
ing arrangements, which, together with 
environmental sound regulations, are 
usually the responsibility of a municipal 
authority or local council. In contrast, 
occupational health and safety laws are 
more often within the function of state 
or federal governments.
The involvement of multiple levels 
of government, and different rules and 
regulations, increases the complexity as-
sociated with achieving compliance and 
can lead to considerable confusion for 
music venues. Successfully navigating 
the regulatory infrastructure to ensure 
that any new regulations are consistent 
with pre-existing rules will involve 
cooperation between various groups. It 
is notable that the European countries 
with some of the most highly developed 
systems for managing entertainment 
sound levels are the result of joint action 
by policy-makers and music industry 
representatives. In the Netherlands for 
example, a covenant has been in place 
since 2014, and although it has no legal 
status, it is the result of a collaboration 
between the Dutch Ministry for Health, 
Welfare and Sport and the two main 
national music industry bodies (the 
Association of Event Makers and the 
Association of Dutch Pop Music Venues 
and Festivals).4 Other countries, such as 
Norway and Austria, have taken a com-
bined approach to the control of sound 
at entertainment venues by publishing 
both environmental and hearing health 
guidelines in a single document. The aim 
is to help venue operators understand 
what they need to do to comply with 
the multiple regulations which apply.5,6
It is important, however, to consider 
the issue of enforcement when devising 
regulations for entertainment venues, 
and whether regulations can be effective 
without accompanying enforcement by a 
local authority. In San Francisco, for ex-
ample, where earplugs must be available 
in music venues of a certain size, there 
is no enforcement by local police, and 
yet compliance with regulations by 13 
out of 18 venues was reported in 2015.7 
This is likely due to the fact that the re-
quirement to supply earplugs has been 
in place since 2002, it is a relatively low-
cost measure and is easy to implement. 
In Germany, where more extensive, but 
voluntary, sound level guidelines are in 
place, researchers found that sound lev-
els in 16 out of 20 indoor dance-music 
venues exceeded the sound level limit.8 
When sound levels in entertainment 
venues are enforced, compliance rates 
seem to be better. For example, a study 
of dance music festivals in Belgium, 
found high compliance rates9 and a 
Swiss study found that 258 (87%) of 296 
measurements taken at concerts held 
during a music festival were compliant.10 
Both studies were conducted at outdoor 
music festivals, where there is a long 
tradition of monitoring and enforcing 
(environmental) sound levels, which 
may go some way towards explaining 
the higher rates of compliance at these 
types of events.
Enforcement brings with it sev-
eral challenges, many of which are 
dependent on the requirements of the 
regulation. In Belgium, for example, 
sound level measurements must comply 
with detailed guidelines11 that require 
enforcement officers to record mea-
surements over two periods (15- and 
60-minute measurements are specified). 
The measurements must be uninterrupt-
ed, in a position that is representative of 
the audience exposure, and made using 
a class I sound level metre (International 
Electrotechnical Commission standard 
61672) that is calibrated immediately 
before and after the procedure. Officers 
Regulations to reduce risk of hearing damage in concert venues
Elizabeth Francis Beach,a Robert Cowan,b Johannes Mulderc & Ian O’Briend
a National Acoustic Laboratories, Australian Hearing Hub, 16 University Avenue, Macquarie University NSW 2109, Sydney, Australia.
b Department of Audiology and Speech Pathology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
c School of Arts, Murdoch University, Perth, Australia.
d Queensland Conservatorium of Music, Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia.
Correspondence to Elizabeth Francis Beach (email: elizabeth.beach@nal.gov.au).
(Submitted: 18 August 2019 – Revised version received: 2 March 2020 – Accepted: 3 March 2020 – Published online: 7 April 2020 )

=== página 2 ===
368
Bull World Health Organ 2020;98:367–369| doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2471/BLT.19.242404
Perspectives
Regulations to reduce risk of hearing damage in music venues
Elizabeth Francis Beach et al.
must operate covertly to avoid venue 
staff lowering the sound level when they 
notice the officers. Furthermore, the 
measurements should not include in-
tentional heckling and excessive crowd 
noise (which, with a sizeable crowd, can 
easily exceed expected sound levels). 
Both these factors can contaminate a 
measurement and render it invalid. 
Consequently, in addition to the sound 
level data, an audio recording may also 
be required to ascertain whether the 
sound level was reduced by the operator 
when compliance officers were present 
or whether a sound level breach was 
an inadvertent result of audience noise 
(rather than the music).
The alternative to enforcement is 
implementation of voluntary guide-
lines with little or no external oversight 
or audit. In this case, it is likely that 
some venues will simply ignore the 
guidelines, since there is no penalty for 
failing to comply. In other cases, venues 
that are already subject to enforceable 
environmental sound limits (in which 
compliance is a pre-condition for a 
venue permit) will continue to focus on 
meeting the pre-existing limits.
To comply with regulations, venues 
will likely incur some costs. For example, 
venues may be required to purchase, in-
stall and regularly calibrate sound level 
meters, other sound system enhance-
ments or other monitoring equipment. 
Venues may need to engage acoustic 
consultants to advise on measurement 
procedures (and in some cases may be 
required to do so before applying for 
a permit). Venue operators also need 
to supply earplugs, and in some cases, 
they may be required to reconfigure 
their venues to provide quiet spaces or 
restrict access to speakers, which could 
be expensive. A programme of financial 
incentives and a staged introduction of 
the new regulations would allow venues 
the necessary time and resources to 
comply with the new regulations.
For enforcement agencies, there 
are also costs for staffing, training and 
acquisition and calibration of equip-
ment. Taking measurements, storing 
data, issuing warnings, penalty notices 
and fines all incur costs and consume 
time for the enforcing authority. These 
issues will need to be considered when 
deciding whether and how to enforce 
new hearing health- related regulations 
in entertainment venues.
Ideally, the introduction of new 
regulations would be supported with 
appropriate training for venue staff 
involved in managing sound levels and 
implementing the regulations, that is 
sound engineers and venue managers. In 
Germany, for example, a 3-hour tutorial 
was offered to disc jockeys when volun-
tary sound level limits were introduced. 
The training included instruction on the 
physics of sound, the physiology of the 
ear and the impact of loud music on 
hearing, and technical issues related to 
sound level monitoring and measure-
ment.8 Although the training did not 
necessarily lead to reduced sound levels 
in venues, there is a strong case for pro-
viding sound engineers with the neces-
sary knowledge and skills to manage 
sound levels and keep within the speci-
fied limits. Musicians, venue managers 
and others responsible for the sound 
levels would also benefit from training 
and information about sound levels in 
general and the impact of new regula-
tions. For sound engineers, the training 
should be practical and hands-on, with 
a strong focus on techniques for reduc-
ing sound levels while maintaining the 
perception of loudness, such as increas-
ing the volume of the bass and adding 
vibro-tactile feedback.12 Care is needed 
however, to ensure that these techniques 
do not encroach on co-existing environ-
mental sound limits. In an ideal world, 
training and accreditation of sound en-
gineers, along with regular check-ups on 
their hearing health, would be included 
as part of a regulation, perhaps as a pre-
condition for obtaining a venue permit.
To support the introduction of 
regulations in venues, it will also be 
important to educate patrons about 
the risks associated with loud music 
exposure. There are several non-profit 
education campaigns, which, when 
combined with advocacy from high-
profile musicians (often with acquired 
music-induced hearing loss themselves), 
can be a powerful motivational tool. 
Australia’s Hearsmart,13 the I Love My 
Ears campaign in the Netherlands14 
and the United States-based Hearing 
Education and Awareness for Rockers15 
are examples of initiatives that en-
courage individuals to prioritize their 
hearing health. Ideally, regulations and 
awareness-raising campaigns like these 
will work together to promote adoption 
of hearing health measures in venues by 
all stakeholders: managers, sound engi-
neers, musicians and patrons.
Regulations for entertainment 
venues are in place in some countries 
and there are moves to consider in-
troducing similar regulations in other 
markets. We believe that regulations 
should be considered as part of a wider 
solution that also includes education 
and awareness-raising for patrons, musi-
cians, sound engineers and venue staff. 
Regulations should be simple, practical, 
easily understood and well-integrated 
with existing regulatory frameworks for 
environmental and occupational sound 
exposure. Enforcement procedures and 
cost implications will also need to be 
addressed. Ideally, the development of 
new regulations will have the support 
and involvement of multiple stakehold-
ers who believe in the importance of 
reducing hearing risks in entertain-
ment venues. All those involved will 
need to be committed to supporting 
the implementation process, despite 
the widespread attitude in the music 
industry that louder sound is better. The 
stakeholders will need to work together 
to identify appropriate sound level limits 
and practical hearing health measures 
that are achievable across a wide range 
of venue types, from large multiday 
music festivals to small inner-city music 
venues. ■
Competing interests: None declared.
References
1.	
Hearing loss due to recreational exposure to loud sounds: a review. Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 2015. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/
bitstream/handle/10665/154589/9789241508513_eng.pdf [cited 2010 Jan 
18].
2.	
Arlinger S. Negative consequences of uncorrected hearing loss–a review. 
Int J Audiol. 2003 Jul;42(sup2) Suppl 2:2S17–20. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.3109/14992020309074639 PMID: 12918624
3.	
Beach EF, Mulder J, O’Brien I, Cowan R. Applying the hierarchy of hazard 
control to regulation of sound levels in entertainment venues. Ann Work 
Expo Health. 2020; (Forthcoming).
4.	
Association of Dutch Pop Music Venues and Festivals. [Third Covenant 
on prevention of hearing damage from amplified music. Version 
051218]. The Hague: Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport; 2018. Dutch. 
Available from: https://vnpf.nl/media/files/derde-convenant-preventie-
gehoorschade-05122018-00000002.pdf [cited 2010 Jan 18]. 

=== página 3 ===
369
Bull World Health Organ 2020;98:367–369| doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2471/BLT.19.242404
Perspectives
Regulations to reduce risk of hearing damage in music venues
Elizabeth Francis Beach et al.
5.	
[Music venues and health: guide for organizers and municipalities].
Oslo: Directorate of Health; 2011. Norwegian. Available from: https://
helsedirektoratet.no/Lists/Publikasjoner/Attachments/661/Musikkanlegg-
og-helse-veileder-til-arrangorer-og-kommuner-IS-0327.pdf [cited 2010 Jan 
18].
6.	
[Noise directive for events]. Vienna: Government of Austria; 2011. German. 
Available from: http://www.umweltbundesamt.at/fileadmin/site/
publikationen/REP0310.pdf [cited 2010 Jan 18]. 
7.	
Ullman E, Peck K, Simon H. ‘Plugs in the Clubs’ initiative. Canadian 
Audiologist. 2015;2(3). Available from: https://www.canadianaudiologist.ca/
issue/volume-2-issue-3-2015/plugs-in-the-clubs-initiative/ [cited 2010 Jan 
18].
8.	
Twardella D, Wellhoefer A, Brix J, Fromme H. High sound pressure 
levels in Bavarian discotheques remain after introduction of voluntary 
agreements. Noise Health. 2008 Oct-Dec;10(41):99–104. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.4103/1463-1741.44348 PMID: 19075456
9.	
Kok M. Sound level measurements at dance festivals in Belgium. In: 
Proceedings of the 10th European Congress and Exposition on Noise 
Control Engineering (EuroNoise), 31 May–3 June 2015, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands. Heerde: EuroNoise; 2015. Available from: https://www.conforg.
fr/euronoise2015/proceedings/data/articles/000265.pdf [cited 2010 Jan 
18].
10.	 Mercier V, Luy D, Hohmann BW. The sound exposure of the audience at a 
music festival. Noise Health. 2003 Apr-Jun;5(19):51–8. PMID: 12804212
11.	 Debruyne S. [Evaluation of music activities regulations LNE/LHRMG/
OL201300003: final report]. Brussels: Bureau de Fonseca; 2015. Dutch. 
Available from: https://www.lne.be/sites/default/files/atoms/files/
EindrapportEvaluatieRegelgevingMuziekactiviteiten.pdf [cited 2010 Jan 18]. 
12.	 Chasin M. Loudness and intensity: two more tricks to help conserve a 
musician’s hearing. Hearing Review. 2014;21(3):16.
13.	 HEARsmart [internet]. Melbourne: Department of Audiology and Speech 
Pathology, University of Melbourne; undated. Available from: http://www.
hearsmart.org [cited 2010 Jan 18].
14.	 I Love my Ears [internet]. Amsterdam: Veiligheid NL; undated. Available 
from: http://www.ilovemyears.com [cited 2010 Jan 18].
15.	 H.E.A.R. Hearing Education and Awareness for Rockers. San Francisco: 
H.E.A.R.; undated. Available from: http://www.hearnet.com [cited 2010 Jan 
18].
