 Axon Body 4 
 Watch the Axon Body 4 launch webinar . Watch now 
 AXON Body 4
 LEARN MORE 
 Capture Every Moment 
 Introducing
Axon Body 4
 With a full-shift battery without compromise, optional POV accessory, improved camera and bi-directional communication capabilities, Axon Body 4 gives you more of what you need.
 Enhanced evidence capture.
 See more and capture better details with an upgraded sensor, wider field of view, and optional point-of-view camera module.
 160° field of view
 1
 0
 3
 6
 9
 6
 %
 more than Axon Body 3
 Maximized Battery Life.
 Axon Body 4 has fast charging capabilities and a full-shift battery, even when using real-time services. Plus, it offers streamlined camera administration and usage.
 Real-time situational awareness and support.
 Receive alerts and locate users on live maps, upload video remotely and communicate bi-directionally with support teams when used with Respond+.
 More points of view.
 Capture unique perspectives with optional point-of-view camera module. Fits on tactical eyewear, lapels, or in-hand.
 Bridge language barriers with your body-worn camera
 Real-Time Translation  supports real-time conversation in more than 50 languages, helping officers communicate clearly and quickly make informed decisions when a human translator isn’t available.
 Learn More 
 Plug-and-play POV
 Flex POV module plugs into the Axon Body 4 camera to record from new angles. Module has a IP67 waterproof rating , and doesn't require charging.
 Rewrite Report Writing
 Draft One force multiplies agencies and saves officers multiple hours every week by automatically drafting police report narratives based on body-worn camera audio.
 Watch the Webinar 
 Axon Body 4 takes body-worn technology to the next level.
 "Looking at officers’ perspectives during live-streamed responses helps boost morale and increases officer safety."
 — Lieutenant Charles Hernandez of Flagstaff PD
 "The battery life is the biggest improvement."
 — Field Trial Partner
 “[Axon Body 4] works really well...[in] situations where you can’t use your radio.”
 — Field Trial Partner 
 “The bi-directional communications feature] is a lot faster than to have to stop what I am doing, to key up on my radio.”
 — Field Trial Partner
 Capture more
 Truth
 More
 support options
 More at the core.
 Axon Body 4 with
 Axon Respond
 Axon Signal
 Axon Fleet 3
 Axon Evidence
 Real-time situational awareness, now with bi-directional communications.
 Wireless activation of video capture with Axon Signal.
 Holistic video capture from both the vehicle and the user when used with Axon Fleet 3.
 Seamless integration with Axon Evidence.
 Axon Body 4 Features
 More expansive images and video
 Increased visibility with 4:3 aspect ratio and 160-degree field of view.
 Extended life for maximum uptime
 Don’t let a dead battery leave you exposed. With a larger 4300 mAh battery, Axon Body 4 lasts a full shift.
 Robust bi-directional communications
 Enhance collaboration with our two-way communication feature, enabling field personnel to share body camera livestreams with support teams.
 Clearer, more detailed recordings
 Secure clearer and more detailed images for improved evidence collection with an upgraded 5MP camera sensor.
 Streamlined operations
 Easily manage cameras and track recording status with simplified registration, programmable buttons, mute reminders, and confirmation prompts.
 Real-time support
 Axon Respond offers real-time support with live maps, instant alerts, and live streams. Upload critical recordings on-the-go.
 Faster, more convenient charging
 Get back to work quickly with the new magnetic disconnect fast charge cable, which delivers 20% charge to your device in 30 minutes.
 Improved security and storage
 Capture secure footage with XTS-AES 256 encryption and store more with 128GB solid state hard drive.
 Capture scenes from any angle
 Expand Axon Body 4 camera’s perspective with the Flex POV accessory, which is IP67 waterproof, durable, and wearable without needing charging. Please note: the body-worn camera itself is IP68 waterproof.
 Articles & Resources
 Axon Body 4 Media
 Access photos, videos, and press materials all about our latest body-worn camera
 Evolution of the Axon Body Camera
 Axon's BWC solutions have grown from simple cameras to full-fledged communications devices
 Bi-Directional Communication Use Cases
 Two-way communication between first responders and command is the next step in operational efficiency
 Learn more
 Contact Axon for pricing programs and plans to fit your agency's needs.
 Contact Us 
 0%
 0%
 