
=== p.1 ===
Transport 
for NSW
NSW 
Automated 
Enforcement 
Strategy for 
road safety
November 2022
roadsafety.transport.nsw.gov.au

=== p.2 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
1
Executive Summary
  2
1	
Introduction
  4
1.1	
Background 
  4
1.2	 Purpose of the NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy
  4
1.3	 Our commitment to reduce trauma
  5
1.4	 The road safety problem
  5
2	
The role of enforcement in road safety
  7
2.1	 Best practice enforcement principles
  7
2.2	 Existing automated road safety enforcement in NSW
  8
3	
Automated Enforcement Strategy: Aims, Principles and Action areas
  10
4	
Action Area – The future of automated enforcement for road safety in NSW
  11
4.1	 Behaviours to be targeted 
  11
4.2	 Modernising enforcement solutions
  11
4.3	 Expert Advisory Group for Automated Enforcement
  13
4.4	 Requirements of technology solutions
  14
5	
Action Area – Selection of enforcement locations
  15
5.1	 Inclusion of automated enforcement in road design 
  17
5.2	 Approval and removal of locations
  17
6	
Action Area – Engaging the community and fostering support for automated enforcement
  18
6.1	 Reinforcing safe behaviours
  18
6.2	 The varied use of automated enforcement in enhancing safety
  18
6.3	 The role of signage and publication of locations
  19
6.4 Redirecting fine revenue to fund road safety improvements
  19
6.5	 Ongoing community research
  19
6.6	 Continued community input
  20
6.7	 Public education campaigns
  20
7	
Action Area – Ensuring fair enforcement
  21
7.1	
Automated enforcement policies 
  21
7.2	
Legislative frameworks
  22
8	
Action Area – Evaluating the Automated Enforcement Strategy
  23
8.1	 Evaluation of the Strategy 
  23
8.2	 Monitoring the performance of automated enforcement programs 
  23
8.3	 Review of the Strategy
  23
9	
Summary of actions 
  24
Endnotes
  26
Contents
Version 1 	
Published September 2022.
Version 1.1 	
Published November 2022.

=== p.3 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
2
Executive Summary
The NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety 
(‘Strategy’) provides an overarching framework to manage 
the automated enforcement programs used in NSW which 
continue to help reduce road trauma in NSW.  
This Strategy is a key component in the NSW 
Government’s 2026 Road Safety Action Plan, to 
achieve Transport for NSW’s (Transport) long-
term goal of zero road deaths and serious injuries 
by 2050, consistent with the vision set by both 
the NSW Future Transport Strategy and the 
National Road Safety Strategy 2021-30.  
The Strategy builds on the success of the 
current NSW automated enforcement programs, 
and harnesses technological advancements 
to implement more innovative, flexible and 
sustainable solutions to respond to existing and 
emerging road trauma issues and risks in NSW. 
Community research shows high support for 
camera enforcement, with 63 per cent up to 
almost 80 per cent of a representative sample 
of NSW residents supporting the different 
camera types1. Additionally, almost two thirds 
(65 per cent) agree that using existing cameras 
to enforce other road rule offences would help to 
improve road safety2.
The overarching aim of this Strategy is to:
•	 Deliver reductions in road trauma on NSW 
roads aligned to our trauma reduction targets, 
by reducing illegal and unsafe road behaviour
•	 Reduce the risk of trauma related crashes
•	 Complement on-road policing. 
The expected benefits of this Strategy are: 
	
✓Fewer deaths and injuries on NSW roads
	
✓Overall reduction of the risk of trauma 
related crashes
	
✓The NSW automated enforcement programs 
are better aligned to best practice evidence in 
achieving trauma reductions. 
	
✓Greater compliance and behaviour 
change among the community due to 
enhanced understanding & support of 
automated enforcement.
	
✓More innovative, flexible and sustainable 
technology solutions that further complement 
on road policing.
A key set of principles which underpin and guide 
the Strategy to help it achieve its aim are as 
follows: 
•	 An evidence-based approach to designing 
enforcement solutions 
•	 Support with positive reinforcement 
•	 Fair enforcement 
•	 Address a range of unsafe road behaviours 
•	 Communicate effectively with the community 
•	 Balance network-wide with localised 
deterrence 
•	 Select enforcement locations through clear 
guidelines 
•	 Flexible and sustainable solutions 
•	 Support industry innovation
•	 Use existing assets efficiently 
The table following summarises the actions 
to be delivered throughout the lifecycle of 
the Strategy.

=== p.4 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
3
Table 1. NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy – key areas and actions
Key Area
Actions
Automated 
enforcement 
solutions 
•	 Actively explore new and improved automated enforcement solutions 
considering:
	– Enhancement of existing technology and policies; 
	– Expansion of the capabilities of existing enforcement technology to 
detect additional risky behaviours; and 
	– Innovation, including seeking out new solutions.
•	 Establish an expert advisory group to provide advice on automated 
enforcement developments.
•	 Identify and implement the most appropriate solution for speed 
enforcement in road work zones.
Enforcement 
locations
•	 Use the criteria outlined in this Strategy for selecting locations for 
automated enforcement, and make this publicly available.  
•	 Continue to allow the community to nominate locations for speed and red-
light cameras, along with road network managers (including local councils) 
and NSW Police for all camera types.
•	 Integrate automated enforcement into road planning and design, and 
upgrades of key routes.
Communication 
and education 
•	 Engage the community to increase understanding of, and support for, the 
different ways automated enforcement is used in NSW to improve safety, 
to foster greater support and acceptance.
•	 Increase community awareness of the Community Road Safety Fund 
through enhanced information and communication, outlining where the 
funds are invested throughout the year.
•	 Continue to publish the locations of site and route based automated 
enforcement designed to address high risk locations, as well as the broad 
locations of mobile speed camera enforcement.
•	 Consider extending public nominations for locations for automated 
enforcement, beyond speed and red-light cameras.
•	 Develop public education campaigns to support any new, expanded or 
enhanced automated enforcement.
Ensuring fair 
enforcement 
•	 Explore additional positive rewards or reminders for motorists to help 
motivate and reinforce safe road behaviours.
•	 Review existing penalty related policies and develop new policies where 
relevant, to ensure fair and transparent enforcement processes.
•	 Work with Revenue NSW to determine the suitability of including the 
relevant offence image on infringement notices.
•	 Work with Revenue NSW and Service NSW to expand the possibility of the 
electronic delivery of infringements, and notifications of infringements, for 
broader implementation.
•	 Work with Revenue NSW and Service NSW to appraise the current process 
for requesting a review of an infringement to ensure it is straightforward 
and transparent.
Research and 
evaluation
•	 Continue to monitor community attitudes toward automated
enforcement.
•	 Complete an evaluation of the Strategy and its enforcement programs.
•	 Continue to monitor the effectiveness of individual camera programs and 
make this information publicly available.

=== p.5 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
4
1	
Introduction
1.1	 Background 
Technology-based automated enforcement to 
improve road safety outcomes is a feature in all 
national and leading international jurisdictions. 
It is proven as a high value measure to tackle 
persistent risky road user behaviours and reduce 
road trauma. In NSW we have been delivering 
effective automated enforcement since 1988, 
having been used primarily to target speeding 
and red-light running to reduce crashes at 
high-risk locations, and more broadly across 
the network. Cameras also assist with fatigue 
compliance among heavy vehicle drivers and 
detecting unregistered driving. 
Following the NSW Auditor-General’s audit 
of speed cameras in NSW in 2011, Transport 
developed an evidence-based Speed Camera 
Strategy (2012) to ensure the various types of 
cameras being used were effective in reducing 
road trauma. Since this Strategy, speed cameras 
used in NSW have continued to deliver road 
safety benefits. 
In 2020, NSW introduced the world-first Mobile 
Phone Detection Camera program to enforce 
illegal mobile phone use while driving, following 
a comprehensive pilot of new technology. These 
same cameras will also begin enforcing seatbelt 
non-use as part of the 2026 Road Safety 
Action Plan. As the capabilities of enforcement 
technology continue to advance, and the 
application of camera enforcement in Australia 
and internationally has expanded and evolved, 
harnessing this new technology is an opportunity 
for NSW to reframe our approach to automated 
enforcement.   
In light of this, and to help achieve the long-term 
vision of zero deaths and serious injuries on 
NSW roads, the need to develop a new, broader 
Strategy that builds upon the success of the 
Speed Camera Strategy was identified.
1.2	 Purpose of the NSW 
Automated Enforcement 
Strategy
The Strategy provides
an overarching framework
to manage the automated
enforcement programs used in
NSW, assist innovation in this
space, and continue to help
reduce NSW road trauma.
This Strategy is a key action in the NSW 
Government’s 2026 Road Safety Action Plan to 
achieve Transport’s long-term vision of zero road 
deaths and serious injuries by 2050, set by the 
NSW Future Transport Strategy and the National 
Road Safety Strategy 2021-30. 
This Strategy also aligns with the vision of the 
NSW Future Transport Technology Roadmap 
2021–24 to be a leader in the use of innovative 
and transformative technologies for transport 
and mobility solutions for its customers.
The following Strategy outlines the road safety 
problem, and the role for enforcement including 
best practice principles. It covers its core aims, 
underlying principles to achieve these aims 
and how future automated enforcement will be 
explored, communicated and monitored in NSW.  

=== p.6 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
5
1.3	 Our commitment to 
reduce trauma
Implementation of this Strategy is a key action 
in the NSW Government’s 2026 Road Safety 
Action Plan. This new Plan builds on the previous 
Road Safety Plan 2021 and sets out new and 
proven road safety initiatives to further reduce 
the road toll and contribute toward achieving 
NSW Government road safety targets. In line 
with the targets set by the National Road Safety 
Strategy 2021–30, the 2026 Road Safety Action 
Plan sets new targets to reduce road deaths by 
50 per cent and serious injuries by 30 per cent 
by 2030, compared to 2018–20 levels. These 
are not just strategic targets but represent real 
savings to people’s lives. Enhancing automated 
enforcement is one critical measure that will help 
reach these targets.
a	
 Totals will add up to more than the total number of fatalities as some deaths may involve more than one behavioural factor
1.4	 The road safety problem
Each year, on average, around 300 people are 
killed and 10,800 people are seriously injured 
on NSW roads3. The estimated cost to the 
community from fatalities and serious injuries is 
around $8 billion per year4.
Road deaths can involve a range of risky 
behaviours. As shown in Figure 1, the biggest 
contributing factor in NSW is speeding (involved in 
around 40 per cent of road deaths), which includes 
both exceeding the speed limit and travelling at 
inappropriate speed for the conditions; followed 
by illicit drugs (presence of four priority illicit 
drugs in around 24 per cent); tired motorists 
(around 16 per cent); illegal alcohol (around 18 
per cent); and restraint non-use among vehicle 
occupants (around 14 per cent). 
Figure 1: Number of fatalities in NSW by behavioural factor, three–year period 2018-2020a,5 
0
100
200
300
400
500
Speed (Excessive 
or Inappropriate)
Fatigue
Illegal Alcohol
Illicit Drug
Presence
Illegal Alcohol and 
Illicit Drug Presence
Restraint Non- 
Usage (Occupant)
Helmet Non- 
Usage (Motorcyclist)
Use of Hand
Held Phone*
401
163
179
237
68
85
9
9
*under-reported due to difficulty obtaining evidence at crash scenes

=== p.7 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
6
As shown in Figure 2, the key behaviours involved in serious injury trauma are somewhat similar, with 
speeding as the main contributing factor. 
Figure 2: Number of matched serious injuries in NSW by behavioural factor, three year 
period 2018-20206
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Speed (Excessive 
or Inappropriate)
Fatigue
Illegal Alcohol
Illicit Drug
Presence
Illegal Alcohol and 
Illicit Drug Presence
Restraint Non- 
Usage (Occupant)
Helmet Non- 
Usage (Motorcyclist)
Use of Hand
Held Phone*
3435
1706
951
444
45
245
94
42
*under-reported due to difficulty obtaining evidence at crash scenes
The majority of road fatalities in NSW happen on country roads (65 per cent), while most serious injuries 
happen in metropolitan areas (58 per cent). Over a third of fatalities (35 per cent) and almost two thirds 
of serious injuries (60 per cent) happen where the speed limit is 60 km/h or less7.
Road crash statistics and safety risks will be considered when reviewing potential automated 
enforcement solutions for use in NSW (see ‘Behaviours to be targeted’ in section 4.1).

=== p.8 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
7
2	 The role of enforcement in 
road safety
The NSW Government adopts the Safe System 
approach to address road safety. The Safe 
System approach aims to create an environment 
that helps people avoid a crash and minimise the 
risk of injury or death if a crash occurs. It does 
this through a combination of infrastructure 
and vehicle safety features, setting safe travel 
speeds, and fostering safe behaviours. Effective 
legislation, enforcement and licensing systems, 
as well as education and information to make 
better choices on our roads, all help to encourage 
safe and legal road user behaviour and minimise 
the risk of road trauma. 
Effective enforcement of road rules is essential 
to a safe system – be that by police enforcement, 
automated enforcement or a combination of both. 
Enforcement and effective penalties changes 
road user behaviour and helps encourage 
motorists to comply with the road rules, resulting 
in reduced risk, fewer crashes and reduced 
road trauma.
Enforcement deters motorists from engaging in 
illegal behaviours in two ways:
•	 Specific deterrence – occurs when a motorist 
who has been penalised for an offence no 
longer engages in that behaviour for fear of 
incurring additional penalties.
•	 General deterrence – occurs when a motorist 
refrains from illegal behaviours as a result of 
observing others being penalised or is warned 
of the penalties for illegal behaviours or 
likelihood of being caught.
Police enforcement and automated enforcement 
complement each other in deterring illegal 
behaviour by road users. A highly visible 
and sustained police presence is critical in 
deterring road users from a range of behaviours 
by increasing the perceived likelihood of 
getting caught. 
Automated enforcement complements this 
by allowing for efficient, cost effective and 
ongoing enforcement across the road network. 
Automated enforcement can remain at a location 
on a permanent or long-term basis, as well as 
enforce areas where police access is difficult or 
unsafe, such as in tunnels, or motorways with 
no enforcement bays. Automated enforcement 
has the ability to be highly visible or covert and 
is used in both ways depending on the issue to 
be addressed. The technology also allows police 
more time to enforce other important road safety 
issues that are not detectable by automated 
enforcement, such as drink and drug driving. 
2.1	 Best practice enforcement 
principles
Research shows that there are key principles 
for achieving effective road enforcement. These 
principles provide a basis for the ways in which 
automated enforcement will be used in NSW to 
address different risky road user behaviours. 
Deterrence before detection
The main aim of enforcement should be to 
promote road safety by deterring motorists from 
illegal or risky behaviour through evidence based 
best practice enforcement programs. If motorists 
believe it is likely they will get caught, they are 
more likely to comply with the road rules, which 
reduces the risk of crashing8. This highlights 
the role of general deterrence, as well as the 
importance of the principle of educating about 
enforcement in achieving deterrence (outlined 
below). Detecting non-compliance among 
motorists, while critical for the small proportion 
of regular offenders, should be a secondary aim9. 

=== p.9 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
8
Effective localised and network wide 
enforcement 
Improving compliance at specific high-
risk locations can be achieved relatively 
easily through fixed or targeted automated 
enforcement. However, many risky behaviours do 
not only occur at specific locations, and resulting 
trauma is spread across the whole road network. 
Therefore, the use of automated enforcement 
across the whole network is also required to 
address the limited predictability of crash 
locations across the State, and deliver a broader 
road safety benefit. 
Visibility should vary 
Road offences can be either:
•	 Fixed – a physical or legal state than cannot 
be changed when the driver becomes aware of 
enforcement (e.g. driving under the influence 
of alcohol or drugs) 
•	 Transient – where a driver can choose to 
comply at a particular time or location and not 
at another (e.g. speeding, hand held mobile 
phone use).
For fixed offences, high visibility enforcement 
is more beneficial in deterring the behaviour as 
motorists are more likely to believe they will 
get caught10. 
For transient offences both highly visible and 
covert enforcement are useful for achieving 
different objectives11. Highly visible enforcement 
is most effective in achieving deterrence at 
specific high-risk locations. Motorists are made 
aware of the enforcement through its visibility 
and can modify their behaviour if necessary. Less 
visible, covert operations are more effective when 
aiming for compliance across the road network. 
The unpredictability of enforcement that could 
occur anytime or anywhere, encourages drivers 
to comply with road rules at all times, not only 
when they see enforcement12, 13. 
Sufficient scale to ensure 
unpredictability 
When aiming for network-wide compliance, 
the size, intensity and random nature of the 
program affect its success. If only a small 
number of enforcement locations exist – or few 
operating hours for mobile enforcement, that 
are not sufficiently random – motorists will learn 
where they need to obey the road rules to avoid 
receiving an infringement but still offend when 
they believe there is little risk of detection. A 
larger number of sites or mobile hours across a 
wide range of locations, along with randomised 
operations, is needed to achieve an expectation 
of anywhere, anytime enforcement. Motorists 
are then more likely to obey the road rules 
across the whole road network. The optimal 
size and intensity of the program is best 
determined by factors such as road network 
size, population size, road usage and number of 
registered vehicles14. 
Educating about enforcement 
Enforcement is more effective in changing 
behaviour when combined with public education 
and communications, to ensure people are aware 
of the enforcement and are deterred from illegal 
behaviours. This may include public education 
campaigns, signage, or where appropriate, 
visibility of enforcement. 
In addition, education can improve support for 
enforcement and subsequently, compliance. 
For example, in relation to speed enforcement, 
research shows public education to remove 
misconceptions of enforcement practices may 
increase the acceptability and support for 
enforcement, and result in voluntary compliance 
rather than just reactive compliance15. 
2.2	 Existing automated road 
safety enforcement in 
NSW
Since 1988, automated enforcement has been 
integral to road safety in NSW and supplements 
road safety enforcement conducted by the NSW 
Police. In 2022 automated enforcement used to 
address road safety spans speeding, red-light 
running, illegal mobile phone use, unregistered 
driving and assists with fatigue compliance 
among heavy vehicle drivers. Automated 
enforcement will also be used to address 
seatbelt non-use as part of the 2026 Road Safety 
Action Plan.

=== p.10 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
9
Speed and red-light cameras
Speed cameras detect vehicles that exceed the 
posted speed limit. They have been proven to 
make roads safer by reducing speeding and 
in turn the number and severity of crashes16. 
There are four types of speed cameras currently 
used in NSW. Each are used in different ways to 
encourage drivers to comply with the speed limit.
•	 Fixed speed cameras – detect speeding at 
specific, high risk locations.
•	 Red-light speed cameras – detect 
speeding and red-light running at specific 
signalised intersections.
•	 Mobile speed cameras – detect speeding 
across the road network by moving around 
various locations at various times, at a scale 
and network spread to support the perception 
of ‘anywhere, anytime’ enforcement.
•	 Average speed cameras – detect heavy vehicle 
speeding between two points on specific high 
volume and/or high-risk routes.
Mobile Phone and Seatbelt Detection 
Cameras 
The Mobile Phone Detection Camera program 
targets drivers illegally using a mobile phone 
when driving and is the first of its kind globally. 
Both fixed and transportable cameras are used. 
The system operates using high-definition 
cameras to capture images of the front-row cabin 
space of all vehicles to detect illegal mobile 
phone use. 
The program aims to achieve general deterrence 
of illegal mobile phone use, and produce 
a sustained change in driver behaviour, by 
promoting that the cameras operate anywhere, 
anytime. 
The NSW Government has now approved the 
use of these same cameras to also detect and 
enforce seatbelt non-use offences as part of 
the 2026 Road Safety Action Plan. The cameras 
will capture non-use among the driver and front 
passenger. As with illegal mobile phone use, this 
program aims to achieve general deterrence of 
seatbelt non-use, through the anywhere, anytime 
operation of the cameras.
Safe-T-Cam 
Safe-T-Cam is a network of digital cameras 
that monitor the movement of heavy vehicles, 
rather than automatically detecting offences. 
Data from Safe-T-Cam is used to target on-road 
enforcement towards high-risk vehicles and 
operators and support prosecution of safety 
offences. Enforcement focuses on fatigue 
offences among fatigue-regulated heavy 
vehicles bound by maximum work and minimum 
rest time; vehicles that are unregistered and/or 
uninsured; attempts to avoid detection at camera 
sites; and failures to enter inspection stations.

=== p.11 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
10
3	 Automated Enforcement 
Strategy: Aims, Principles 
and Action areas
This Strategy builds on the success of the 
current NSW automated enforcement programs, 
and harnesses technological advancements 
to implement more innovative, flexible and 
sustainable solutions to respond to existing and 
emerging road trauma issues and risks. 
The overarching aim of this Strategy is to:
•	 Deliver reductions in road trauma on NSW 
roads aligned to our trauma reduction targets, 
by reducing illegal and unsafe road behaviour 
•	 Reduce the risk of trauma related crashes
•	 Complement on-road policing. 
A set of key principles underpin and guide the 
Strategy to help it achieve these aims:  
•	 An evidence-based approach to designing 
enforcement solutions – consider the road 
safety need, to ensure technology-based 
solutions will tackle areas of risk and reduce 
road trauma.
•	 Support with positive reinforcement – reward 
safe behaviour as well as enforcing risky 
behaviours, to further reinforce road safety 
benefits. 
•	 Fair enforcement – policies and program 
settings are reasonable, privacy measures 
are in place, data managed securely, and 
technology systems are accurate, to aid 
community trust and compliance.
•	 Address a range of unsafe road behaviours – 
to maximise the road safety benefits.
•	 Communicate effectively with the 
community – enhance general awareness and 
transparency of the enforcement programs to 
aid community support and compliance.
•	 Achieve network-wide and localised 
deterrence – use enforcement to reduce 
crash risks at specific locations, in addition to 
tackling network wide behavioural issues.
•	 Select enforcement locations through clear 
guidelines – use set criteria to ensure locations 
are based on safety needs. 
•	 Flexible and sustainable solutions – adapting 
to new, emerging or improved solutions that 
are practical and effective
•	 Support industry innovation – actively seek 
out new or improved technology-based 
enforcement solutions to encourage the 
development of new opportunities.
•	 Use existing assets efficiently – use 
existing infrastructure, cameras and 
technology, including multiple uses of 
technology, to achieve greater benefits while 
minimising costs.
These principles are reflected throughout this 
document and provide the foundation for the 
five key actions areas which represent the focus 
of the Strategy. These action areas are listed in 
the box below and are described in more detail 
throughout the following sections.
NSW Automated Enforcement 
Strategy – Key action areas
	Î
Automated enforcement solutions
	Î
Enforcement locations
	Î
Communication and education
	Î
Ensuring fair enforcement 
	Î
Research and evaluation

=== p.12 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
11
4	 Action Area – The future of 
automated enforcement for 
road safety in NSW
4.1	 Behaviours to be targeted 
With advances in technology it is possible for a 
broad range of risky road user behaviours to be 
targeted through automated enforcement. 
The use of technology to tackle speeding, red-
light running, illegal mobile phone use, seatbelt 
non-use (once commenced) and unregistered 
driving, as well as fatigue breaches among heavy 
vehicle drivers will continue. 
This Strategy supports industry innovation and 
allows for the testing and adoption of new road 
safety solutions that may arise which address 
the above behaviours, as well as other key 
behaviours. To help complement police activities, 
behaviours that are difficult for police to enforce 
from the roadside will also be prioritised for 
automated enforcement.  Solutions will also 
be explored that target behaviours affecting 
vulnerable road users to improve their safety. Any 
behaviour to be enforced must meet all of the 
following criteria:
•	 It is a road safety risk 
•	 It is an illegal road behaviour
•	 Automated enforcement of the behaviour is 
expected to reduce the risk of road trauma and 
can be efficiently and effectively implemented.
4.2	 Modernising enforcement 
solutions
This Strategy will explore new, emerging and 
improved automated enforcement solutions. 
Solutions will only be implemented if they are 
sustainable, easily maintained, flexible and 
adaptable to changes in technology, policy 
or behaviours. The exploration of automated 
enforcement solutions will focus on answering 
questions related to: enhancement, expansion, 
and innovation, as outlined in Figure 3. The 
road safety need, and the role of NSW Police in 
enforcing road laws, will remain central when 
considering each of these areas.

=== p.13 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
12
Figure 3: Areas of exploration for new and improved automated enforcement solutions
Enhancement
Improve current technology 
or policies to maximise the 
road safety benefits
Expansion
Broaden existing automated 
enforcement to detect other 
risky behaviours
Innovation
Use new technology to 
address additional road 
safety risks
	Î
Can our existing technology systems be improved?
	Î
Is our existing automated enforcement based on best 
practice principles?
	Î
What are the gaps within our existing use of automated 
enforcement?
	Î
Can our existing technology be used to detect other 
risky behaviours?
	Î
Are there any opportunities to integrate new solutions?
	Î
Is there an opportunity to detect additional risky behaviours 
through new technology used in other Australian jurisdictions or 
overseas, or through industry innovation?
Enhancement
Under this Strategy, Transport will actively review 
and assess the existing suite of automated 
enforcement used in NSW, to determine areas 
for improvement. It is important that automated 
enforcement used across the road network 
adapts to changes in policy and technology. 
Enhancing already successful programs is also 
likely to achieve increased road safety benefits, 
cost effectively. 
While automated enforcement is already in place 
in NSW for speed, red-light, mobile phone and 
soon seatbelt offences, and assists with heavy 
vehicle fatigue compliance, new technology may 
exist that offers a more efficient or cost-effective 
solution, or that results in greater safety benefits 
(such as enforcing traffic in both directions rather 
than one). 
Enhancements in technology may also allow 
for enforcement to be better targeted (such as 
through red-light running monitoring systems), or 
mean that certain enforcement may no longer be 
necessary in some locations. 
Policies will also be reviewed to ensure current 
automated enforcement follows best practice, 
and that any gaps in terms of risk or application 
are addressed, so that the road safety benefits 
can be maximised.
A key gap within our existing use of automated 
enforcement to be addressed as a priority is 
enforcement in road work zones, including speed 
enforcement. There are often changed road 
conditions and additional hazards in these areas, 
with road workers regularly working close to 
traffic. Transport has a duty of care obligation 
under the NSW Work Health and Safety Act 2011 
to ensure the safety of these workers. Automated 
enforcement, combined with education, is 
crucial in helping achieving compliance with the 
road rules, including reduced speed limits, to 
improve safety for these workers as well as other 
road users.
The active review of automated enforcement will 
also apply to any new solutions that become 
part of the automated enforcement program to 
ensure ongoing improvement.

=== p.14 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
13
Expansion 
One of the principles that guides this Strategy 
is the efficient use of existing assets. There may 
be the opportunity for existing technologies to 
enforce additional risky road behaviours and 
integrate new solutions to further improve safety. 
Doing so may achieve additional benefits, cost 
effectively. This includes non-road-safety related 
cameras and technology such as traffic flow and 
bus lane cameras. 
Any new behaviour to be enforced would need to 
meet the criteria for behaviours to be targeted, 
outlined in this Strategy. 
The capabilities of the current suite of 
enforcement assets will be investigated to 
determine the possibility of expanding these 
to other behaviours that would result in 
increased safety benefits. Non-road-safety 
related automated enforcement assets will 
also be explored for their potential use in road 
safety enforcement.
Innovation
Another guiding principle of this Strategy is to 
support industry innovation and encourage the 
development of new solutions. 
Technological solutions exist in other Australian 
jurisdictions and overseas that can detect a 
range of risky behaviours that are not currently 
enforced through automation in NSW. These 
include tailgating17, illegal turns18, not stopping 
at a stop sign19, overtaking offences20 vehicles in 
wrong lanes21, and illegal railway crossings22.
These will be investigated under this Strategy to 
determine the suitability of their use to address 
road safety within NSW. 
Transport will also seek out solutions to known 
risky behaviours where automated enforcement 
solutions are desired but are not yet developed. It 
may also be possible for in-vehicle enforcement 
via telematics, which could be used in the future 
among high risk or repeat offenders.
Scope of exploration
The initial scope of exploration will primarily 
consider camera based enforcement, however 
this can be reviewed during the life of this 
Strategy to also include other automated 
enforcement solutions as technology evolves. 
4.3	 Expert Advisory Group for 
Automated Enforcement
The exploration of modernised automated 
enforcement solutions will be led by Transport 
and delivered in partnership with relevant 
agencies and industry. Transport will also 
establish an advisory group that may include 
road safety experts, advocacy group members, 
and law enforcement professionals, who will 
provide advice on automated enforcement 
developments. The purpose of the group will be 
to advise on areas including, but not limited to:
•	 Road behaviours that may benefit from 
automated enforcement
•	 Potential new or emerging automated 
enforcement solutions proposed by Transport 
that could be used in NSW to improve 
road safety
•	 The review of enforcement programs against 
best practice enforcement principles
•	 Ways in which automated enforcement 
programs can best complement on 
road policing
•	 Public communications related to automated 
enforcement. 

=== p.15 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
14
4.4	 Requirements of 
technology solutions
Any new solutions considered for use in NSW 
must have the potential to reduce road trauma. 
The criteria for behaviours to be enforced 
will also be considered: being an illegal road 
behaviour, a key road safety risk, and that 
automated enforcement of the behaviour is 
expected to reduce the risk of road trauma. 
If the behavioural criteria is met, the technology 
itself will be carefully considered for use in NSW 
based on:
•	 Effectiveness and accuracy of the technology 
in detecting the specific offence/s
•	 Cost effectiveness of the technology
•	 Ability of the technology to meet any privacy 
or information security requirements
•	 Safety of the deployment of the technology – 
considering risks to workers, the community 
and the environment 
•	 Success of the technology in achieving road 
safety benefits in other Australian jurisdictions 
or overseas (if relevant). 
Any potential new or improved solutions will 
undergo significant testing and be required to 
meet specific performance requirements set by 
Transport before implementation. 
Extensive public education and communication 
will be used to ensure the community is aware of 
any additional road rule offences being enforced 
through cameras or other technology and the 
road safety risk being addressed.

=== p.16 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
15
5	 Action Area – Selection of 
enforcement locations
As is best practice, the Automated Enforcement 
Program will aim to achieve a balance of 
deterrence of illegal behaviours at high-
risk locations, with deterrence across the 
whole network through anytime, anywhere 
enforcement. 
Three types of location-based enforcement will 
be considered for each behaviour to be enforced 
– site-based; route-based; and network-based 
(see Figure 4). Selection of these will depend on 
whether the aim of the enforcement is to address 
a particular localised issue, a network wide 
problem, or a combination. One behaviour may be 
addressed by using multiple types of location-
based enforcement. 
Figure 4: Three types of location-based enforcement aligned to deterrence goal
Site-based 
enforcement 
(e.g. 
intersections 
high risk 
locations)
Addresses 
a localised 
risk, 
trauma or 
behaviour 
problem
Addresses 
a state-
wide risk, 
trauma or 
behaviour 
problem
Route-based 
enforcement 
(e.g. major 
heavy vehicle 
routes, 
motorways, 
tunnels)
Network-
based 
enforcement 
(i.e. State-
wide)
Network wide
deterrence
Location specific
deterrence
Any new automated enforcement, as well as 
the expanded roll out of any existing programs, 
will consider the following criteria to select 
enforcement locations. Some may be more 
relevant than others, depending on the intent of 
the enforcement and the type of location-based 
enforcement used. 
For example, for site and route-based 
enforcement, risk levels will be considered at/
along specific sites and routes to help select 
locations, as this enforcement aims to address a 
safety issue at particular locations. 
However, network-based enforcement aims to 
address a safety risk that is network wide and 
achieve a general deterrent effect; so location-
specific risks do not need to be present for 
enforcement to be used at a location (although 
they still can be). Factors such as volumes of 
vehicles and other road users, geographic spread, 
or operational criteria may be given a greater 
focus to help identify enforcement locations. 

=== p.17 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
16
The below criteria are to be considered in 
combination to select automated enforcement 
locations:
•	 Risk levels – the likelihood of future crashes 
occurring at a specific location, along a 
route, or network-wide. The risk should be 
determined and considered by reviewing a 
range data and information sources:
	– Crash rates and trauma levels – a high 
level of crashes, and fatalities and injuries 
identified through crash data is a good 
predictor of future trauma that needs to 
be addressed. This could relate to a risky 
behaviour that is present across the State, 
or a specific risk at a particular location. 
	– Crash types – crashes that may result in 
greater trauma should be considered – for 
example, intersection T-bone crashes, or 
crashes on higher speed roads are likely to 
have a more severe outcome.
	– Compliance rates – the lower the 
compliance, the greater the risk of crashes. 
Data collected on speed levels and red-
light running, as well as observational 
studies are examples of how this can 
be determined.
	– Volumes of vehicles and other road users 
– the higher the volumes of, the greater 
the risk of a crash due to more road users 
and more chance of an error. For vehicles 
is attained through annual average daily 
traffic (AADT) data. Specific road user 
groups relevant to the enforcement should 
also be considered (for example, pedestrian 
volumes for enforcement of red-light 
running). 
	– Risk assessment tools – the use of specific 
tools to help identify risk including, but 
not limited to, intersection and curve risk 
models, infrastructure risk rating tools, and 
red-light running monitoring software. 
	– Specific safety risks – locations where there 
are specific safety risk to all road users, or 
specific groups, and enforcement can be 
used to help reduce the risk – including but 
not limited to, tunnels, school zones, public 
transport hubs, and road work zones.
	– Safety rating of roads – the rating of the 
road (where it is a State road) using the 
AusRAP (Australian Roads Assessment 
Program) Risk Rating methodology – the 
lower the risk rating, the safer the road. The 
ratings are based on features of the road 
such as road geometry, prevalence of and 
distance to roadside hazards (such as trees 
and power poles) and the speed motorists 
generally travel on the road. Note that this 
does not preclude enforcement locations on 
local roads.
•	 Geographic spread – the distribution of 
enforcement across the road network, 
including metropolitan, country urban and 
country rural NSW; as well as proximity to 
other automated enforcement. 
•	 High movement and place – locations that 
have a high level of movement as well as a 
high place value using the NSW Government’s 
Movement and Place Framework23, to help 
improve the safety of these busy areas, 
particularly for vulnerable road users. The 
Movement and Place Framework recognises 
that streets are not just for moving people and 
goods – they are also places for people to live, 
work and spend time. 
•	 Nominated routes or locations – those 
proposed by NSW Police, the community, local 
councils or Transport regional road safety 
teams, based on evidence of safety risks. 
•	 Difficult locations for NSW Police to 
enforce – locations where it is not possible, 
or not safe, for NSW Police to enforce. For 
example, tunnels, road work zones, locations 
where there is no space for police to pull a 
motorist over. 
•	 Operational criteria – the feasibility of 
the route or location for enforcement. For 
example, work health and safety requirements 
for any operators, technical requirements of 
the enforcement technology, or suitability of 
the route (such as entry and exit opportunities 
along average speed camera lengths). 
•	 Alternative road safety works – road 
development or engineering works already 
planned that will improve the safety of the 
road or location, which is likely to reduce or 
eliminate the need for enforcement.

=== p.18 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
17
Other considerations:
•	 Existing infrastructure – where possible, 
existing infrastructure will be used for any 
new enforcement to help minimise costs. 
This is not a specific criterion for selection of 
locations as these should be based on the road 
safety need. However, existing infrastructure 
may determine exactly where on a route 
selected for enforcement, the automated 
enforcement may be placed.  
The specific criteria for selecting locations will 
differ depending on the enforcement program 
and the deterrent goal.
As is currently the case, all enforcement 
locations will be determined by the NSW 
Centre for Road Safety, in consultation with 
the Transport metropolitan and regional road 
safety teams and NSW Police, to ensure the right 
solutions are being used in the right places to 
provide the maximum road safety gains.
All enforcement cameras, locations, or lengths 
will be recorded in a central database to ensure 
accurate consideration of geographic spread, 
and reporting.
5.1	 Inclusion of automated 
enforcement in road 
design 
To achieve the greatest safety, efficiency and 
financial benefits, automated enforcement 
should be considered during the planning and 
design phase of new roads, and upgrade of key 
routes. For example, consideration of proposed 
infrastructure that could also be used to house 
enforcement cameras, provision of enforcement 
bays for mobile speed camera vehicles, as well 
as police. This is especially key when the road 
environment limits the suite of enforcement 
options available, such as in tunnels and on 
motorways. The NSW Centre for Road Safety 
will work with other areas of Transport to embed 
this process.
5.2	 Approval and removal of 
locations
New locations will be determined by the NSW 
Centre for Road Safety in consultation with 
the Transport metropolitan and regional road 
safety teams, and NSW Police. Locations will be 
approved within Transport. 
Occasionally, some locations where enforcement 
takes place may become unsuitable for 
enforcement. This could be due to factors such 
as road engineering treatments to improve safety, 
road by-passes, policy or operational changes, 
or the site/route-based enforcement aimed 
at addressing a particular high-risk location 
is no longer effectively doing so. This will be 
determined by Transport informed by continued 
monitoring of locations. 

=== p.19 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
18
6	 Action Area – Engaging the 
community and fostering 
support for automated 
enforcement
Community support for automated enforcement 
and understanding its role in improving safety 
are key in helping to achieve compliance 
and improve attitudes and behaviour among 
motorists. While over 99 per cent of vehicles 
passing existing enforcement cameras are 
complying with the road rules and are not 
infringed24,25, more can be done to educate 
the community on the role of these cameras 
in improving safety. A core component of this 
Strategy will be to ensure road users are aware 
of the rationale for automated enforcement and 
its benefits in reducing road trauma. This will be 
achieved through transparency and continued 
education and engagement. 
6.1	 Reinforcing safe 
behaviours
Behaviour change is best achieved through a mix 
of approaches and forcing a change in behaviour 
– such as through enforcement – is only one of 
these. Along with others such as education and 
training which are widely used in road safety, 
incentivisation is a key method26. It is therefore 
important to not only enforce illegal and risky 
behaviour, but to reward good behaviour and 
reinforce it. This is particularly relevant given the 
large majority of motorists who comply with the 
road rules and are not infringed.
Currently in NSW, fully licenced motorists can 
receive a half price licence if they have had 
no demerit points recorded over the last five 
years. This rewards good behaviour, rather than 
punishing bad behaviour, however the reward 
is not an immediate or regular one. Studies into 
human behaviour show that given the choice, 
people prefer a smaller reward sooner over a 
larger reward later27. Other existing benefits for 
positive road behaviours are somewhat ‘unseen’, 
such as not having to pay fines and lower 
insurance costs.
This Strategy proposes the exploration of any 
additional or more immediate, positive rewards or 
reminders that may help motivate and reinforce 
safe behaviours on the road. 
6.2	The varied use of 
automated enforcement in 
enhancing safety
As outlined in this Strategy, automated 
enforcement can be used in different ways to 
improve safety. 
NSW’s existing program of automated 
enforcement is used for both localised and 
network wide deterrence, with differing levels 
of visibility. The NSW Centre for Road Safety will 
work to increase community understanding of, 
and support for, the different ways automated 
enforcement is used, as well as less visible 
operations, in improving safety. This aims to 
foster support and acceptance for automated 
enforcement by reassuring the community that 
while some enforcement may not be highly 
visible, or located at a known ‘black spot’, it still 
plays a key role in reducing road trauma.

=== p.20 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
19
6.3	The role of signage and 
publication of locations
Best practice evidence, outlined earlier, 
highlights that the degree to which automated 
enforcement is highly visible on the network 
is best determined by its aim. High visibility 
operations are more successful to address 
high risk locations (such as site or route-based 
enforcement), as they provide motorists with 
the opportunity to modify their behaviour if 
necessary. Covert operations are more useful 
when aiming to achieve network wide compliance 
through the unpredictability of anytime, 
anywhere enforcement.
As an example, independent modelling28 found 
that, all other things being equal, if the Mobile 
Phone Detection Camera locations were marked 
with advance warning signs, it would take five 
years to achieve the same safety benefits that a 
program without advance warning signs would 
achieve in one year.
The visibility of automated enforcement including 
signage and the publication of the site-specific 
enforcement locations will therefore depend 
on the purpose of the enforcement. In line with 
the automated enforcement principles, fixed, 
red-light and average speed cameras use 
advance signage immediately before the point of 
enforcement to help improve compliance at those 
specific, risky locations and reduce the likelihood 
of a crash. Safe-T-Cam also uses advance 
signage to provide drivers with the opportunity to 
modify their behaviour if necessary and reduce 
the likelihood of a crash, particularly related to 
fatigue. Site-specific details of these cameras 
are published. 
From January 2023, mobile speed cameras will 
also have warning signage before and after the 
vehicle. This, along with fixed signs across the 
network, is intended to raise driver awareness 
that speed enforcement occurs on NSW roads, 
to reduce speeding more generally across the 
network. 
For Mobile Phone and Seatbelt Detection 
Cameras, advance warning signage located 
immediately before the point of enforcement 
is not used to ensure unpredictability and help 
achieve compliance across the whole road 
network. 
For both mobile speed cameras and Mobile 
Phone and Seatbelt Detection Cameras, site-
specific details of enforcement will not be 
published in order to increase unpredictability 
and help achieve network wide deterrence. Other 
advisory signage will be used to raise public 
awareness of these automated enforcement 
programs, such as the use of permanent signage 
or Variable Message Signs (VMS) placed across 
the road network. In addition, the broad areas of 
enforcement may be made publicly available if it 
does not compromise the likely deterrent effect, 
such as the continued publication of the broad 
locations of mobile speed camera enforcement. 
Where automated enforcement is not highly 
visible, other measures will also be used to 
ensure the public are aware of the enforcement. 
This includes public education campaigns; 
information on the NSW Centre for Road Safety 
website; media, including social media; as well as 
warning letter periods prior to infringing drivers. 
6.4	 Redirecting fine revenue 
to fund road safety 
improvements
All money obtained from fines through camera 
detected speeding, red-light, mobile phone use  
and seatbelt (when commenced) offences will 
continue to be invested directly back into road 
safety through the Community Road Safety Fund 
(the Fund), as required in legislation. This money 
directly funds measures in the 2026 Road Safety 
Action Plan such as road safety infrastructure 
upgrades, road safety education programs, 
public education campaigns, additional 
enforcement by NSW Police and other significant 
road safety initiatives. 
The use and expenditure of the Fund will 
continue to be included in the annual NSW 
Road Safety Progress reports. Transport will 
also work to increase community awareness 
of the Fund through enhanced information and 
communication outlining where the funds are 
invested throughout the year. 

=== p.21 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
20
6.5	 Ongoing community 
research
Regular research with the NSW community about 
their attitudes and behaviours toward automated 
enforcement is conducted by Transport. Findings 
show high support for camera enforcement, 
with 63 per cent up to almost 80 per cent of 
a representative sample of NSW residents 
supporting the different camera types29, and 
almost two thirds (65 per cent) of respondents 
agreeing that using existing cameras to enforce 
other road rule offences would help to improve 
road safety30.
Research among the community will continue 
as part of this Strategy. These attitudes and 
behaviours are important to understand in 
order to direct communications with the 
public and help inform decisions around 
any new or expanded technologies or other 
behavioural measures.  
6.6	 Continued community 
input
Each year on average, almost 1,000 nominations 
for speed cameras are received through the 
Safer Roads website31. The NSW Centre for 
Road Safety will continue to accept nominations 
from the public for speed camera locations 
and consider expanding this to automated 
enforcement that detects other behaviours 
where relevant. All nominations will continue to 
be reviewed against the selection criteria. 
6.7	 Public education 
campaigns
Enforcement works best in combination with 
public education to achieve maximum road 
safety results. Educating road users about 
the risks of unsafe driving behaviours and 
informing them about enforcement, gives road 
users the opportunity to modify their behaviour, 
and in turn fewer are infringed for unlawful 
driving behaviours. 
The NSW Centre for Road Safety will continue to 
develop public education campaigns on the road 
safety issues being addressed via automated 
enforcement and encourage safer behaviour 
by road users. All campaigns will follow 
requirements of the Government Advertising 
Act 2011, as well as associated regulations 
and guidelines.
Extensive public education will also be used to 
ensure the community is aware of any new or 
expanded automated enforcement, being used 
across NSW – particularly if any additional road 
rules will be enforced. 

=== p.22 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
21
7	 Action Area – Ensuring fair 
enforcement
7.1	 Automated enforcement 
policies 
There are a range of ways in which automated 
enforcement in NSW is managed and monitored 
to ensure it is fair for road users, and this will 
continue. Measures to ensure fairness will 
include the following, with specific, detailed 
policies developed where relevant:
•	 Placement of enforcement locations – 
selection of enforcement locations will use the 
criteria outlined in Section 5 of this Strategy. 
This includes consideration of the location of 
other automated enforcement that address 
the same behaviour, to ensure they are 
located at a fair distance and motorists are not 
penalised repeatedly for the same occasion 
of offending. 
•	 Multiple penalties from one camera/
technology – individual cameras that enforce 
multiple behaviours present the potential 
for a motorist to lose their licence from one 
occasion.  This will be assessed as part of the 
ongoing monitoring of enforcement programs, 
to determine if further consideration of the 
impact of this is required.   
•	 Enforcement in warning mode – any new 
enforcement program deployed will remain 
in warning mode for a period. This means 
motorists who are detected by the camera 
are sent a letter warning them about the 
enforcement, rather than a fine. This gives 
motorists time to modify their behaviour 
before they are penalised. Motorists who 
display extreme behaviours, such as excessive 
speeding, will continue to be penalised.
•	 Images of offence on infringement notice – 
research has shown that the greatest factor 
in a motorist considering a penalty to be fair, 
and more willing to pay a fine is to include 
a photographic image on the notice, which 
captures them doing the wrong thing32. This 
is viewed as proof that the technology can 
be trusted and therefore a fair penalty. It is 
currently possible to view a photograph of 
the offence on the Revenue NSW website. 
Transport will work with Revenue NSW to 
determine the suitability of including offence 
images on infringement notices, including 
reviewing additional research, assessing 
privacy implications and thoroughly testing 
the technology. 
•	 Electronic delivery of infringement notices – 
Deterrence Theory suggests that the swifter 
the penalty, the more effective it is in deterring 
the behaviour33. The electronic delivery of 
an infringement notice, or an electronic 
notification that the motorist will receive 
one, shortens the time between committing 
a driving offence and receiving a penalty. 
Transport will work with Revenue NSW 
and Service NSW to expand the electronic 
delivery of fines and notifications, for broader 
implementation. 
•	 Accurate camera technology and systems – as 
is currently the case, all cameras, technology 
and measurement systems will be checked 
frequently – consistent with legislation. Fines 
will only be issued where it can be proven a 
behaviour occurred, taking into account the 
limits of measurement error of the device. 
•	 Motorist ability to review penalty – road users 
who receive a fine will continue to be able to 
challenge the penalty and have it reviewed 
if they believe it to be false, by requesting a 
review of the penalty through Service NSW 
or Revenue NSW. Transport will work with 
both Revenue NSW and Service NSW to 
appraise the current process to ensure it is 
straightforward and transparent. 

=== p.23 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
22
•	 Measures to assist those disadvantaged 
– existing measures to help motorists who 
receive an infringement and may have 
difficulty paying the fine will remain in place. 
These include the ability to have the penalty 
reviewed, and where eligible, payment plans 
or orders to complete unpaid work, courses or 
treatments in place of payment. 
7.2	 Legislative frameworks
For any new or improved automated enforcement 
that is proposed, legislation will be reviewed to 
ensure the appropriate frameworks are in place. 
Legislation should be an option to support 
industry innovation, where there is a 
demonstrated road safety need. For example, for 
camera-based detection of mobile phone use 
offences, legislation was amended to enable 
cameras (that met robust standards) to be 
approved and used to detect mobile phone use 
offences before the enforcement technology 
was fully available. This sent a strong signal to 
industry that NSW was open to developing a 
solution in partnership to tackle illegal use of 
mobile phones while driving. The specific device 
was approved under the legislation, but only once 
the technology and systems were developed and 
successfully tested. 
Before any new automated enforcement 
becomes operational, policy, privacy and 
governance measures, including risk 
management and data protection, should also 
be in place to support the program. This ensures 
the consistency and security of enforcement and 
builds further trust in the enforcement. 

=== p.24 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
23
8	 Action Area – Evaluating the 
Automated Enforcement 
Strategy
A core stage in any strategy is evaluation; to 
determine if it is successful in achieving its 
aims and identify ways in which it can be 
improved. Evaluation, performance monitoring 
and subsequent review of the Strategy are 
therefore key to ensuring its success and 
ongoing improvement.
8.1	 Evaluation of the Strategy 
An independent evaluation of the Strategy and 
its enforcement programs will be undertaken. 
This will consider whether the Strategy and its 
enforcement programs have been implemented 
as planned, how well the Strategy is working, 
whether it is achieving its aims, and what impact 
it is having on road safety. It will also consider the 
impact of automated enforcement on the court 
system. The results of the evaluation will be used 
to guide the future shape of the Strategy.
8.2	 Monitoring the 
performance of 
automated enforcement 
programs 
In line with the Auditor General’s 
recommendation, Transport will continue to 
monitor the effectiveness of individual camera 
programs and make this information publicly 
available– in replacement of its annual review of 
speed camera programs. 
8.3	 Review of the Strategy
This Strategy will be reviewed in 2026, to 
determine if it remains suitable for use. A 
recommendation will be made on whether the 
Strategy should continue to exist in its current 
form; remain with some modifications; or be 
replaced in full.

=== p.25 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
24
9	 Summary of actions 
The actions to be delivered by the Strategy for road safety are outlined below. Some actions will 
be ongoing to ensure continuous improvement in automated enforcement throughout the life of 
the Strategy.
Table 1. NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy - key areas and actions
Key Area
Actions
Automated
enforcement 
solutions
•	 Actively explore new and improved automated enforcement solutions 
considering:
	– Enhancement of existing technology and policies; 
	– Expansion of the capabilities of existing enforcement technology to 
detect additional risky behaviours; and 
	– Innovation, including seeking out new solutions.
•	 Establish an expert advisory group to provide advice on automated 
enforcement developments.
•	 Identify and implement the most appropriate solution for speed 
enforcement in road work zones.
Enforcement 
locations
•	 Use the criteria outlined in this Strategy for selecting locations for 
automated enforcement, and make this publicly available.  
•	 Continue to allow the community to nominate locations for speed and 
red-light cameras, along with road network managers (including local 
councils) and NSW Police for all camera types.
•	 Integrate automated enforcement into road planning and design, and 
upgrades of key routes.
Communication and 
education 
•	 Engage the community to increase understanding of, and support for, 
the different ways automated enforcement is used in NSW to improve 
safety, to foster greater support and acceptance.
•	 Increase community awareness of the Community Road Safety Fund 
through enhanced information and communication, outlining where 
the funds are invested throughout the year.
•	 Continue to publish the locations of site and route based automated 
enforcement designed to address high risk locations, as well as the 
broad locations of mobile speed camera enforcement.
•	 Consider extending public nominations for locations for automated 
enforcement, beyond speed and red-light cameras.
•	 Develop public education campaigns to support any new, expanded or 
enhanced automated enforcement.

=== p.26 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
25
Key Area
Actions
Ensuring fair 
enforcement
•	 Explore additional positive rewards or reminders for motorists to help 
motivate and reinforce safe road behaviours.
•	 Review existing penalty related policies and develop new policies 
where relevant, to ensure fair and transparent enforcement 
processes.
•	 Work with Revenue NSW to determine the suitability of including the 
relevant offence image on infringement notices.
•	 Work with Revenue NSW and Service NSW to expand the electronic 
delivery of infringements, and notifications of infringements, for 
broader implementation.
•	 Work with Revenue NSW and Service NSW to appraise the current 
process for requesting a review of an infringement to ensure it is 
straightforward and transparent. 
Research and 
evaluation
•	 Continue to monitor community attitudes toward automated 
enforcement.
•	 Complete an evaluation of the Strategy and its enforcement 
programs.
•	 Continue to monitor the effectiveness of individual camera programs 
and make this information publicly available.

=== p.27 ===
NSW Automated Enforcement Strategy for road safety
Transport for NSW
26
Endnotes
1	
Kantar Colmar Brunton (2021) December results. 
Community Satisfaction with Camera Enforcement. 
Unpublished report for Transport for NSW
2	 Ipsos Public Affairs (2021). 2026 Road Safety Action Plan: 
Community Attitudes. Prepared for the Centre for Road 
Safety, Transport for NSW
3	 NSW Centre for Road Safety crash data, three year period 
2019-2021, provisional fatalities for 2021, preliminary 
serious injuries for the period July 2019- June 2021
4	
Based on the Inclusive Willingness to Pay methodology. 
Willingness to Pay values represent the amount people are 
willing to pay to avoid road death or serious injury. Inclusive 
Willingness to Pay represents the Willingness to Pay costs 
as well as the cost to society due to the crash such as 
vehicle, emergency and other costs. The methodology is in 
accordance with ‘Transport for NSW Economic Parameter 
Values’ June 2020, NSW Government, Transport for NSW.
5	 NSW Centre for Road Safety crash data, three year period 
2018-2020
6	 NSW Centre for Road Safety crash data, three year period 
2018-2020, includes only serious injuries that have been 
matched to police records.
7	
NSW Centre for Road Safety crash data, three year period 
2018-2020
8	 Davey, J. D. & Freeman, J. E. (2010). Improving road safety 
through deterrence-based initiatives: a review of research. 
Sultan Qaboos University Medical Journal
9	 Soole, David, Watson, Barry, & Fleiter, Judy (2014) A review 
of international speed enforcement policies and practices: 
Evidence-based recommendations for best practice. In 
Landry,S, Stanton,N, Vallicelli,A,& Di Bucchianico,G(Eds.) 
Advances in Human Aspects of Transportation, Part I: 
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on 
Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics, AHFE 2014. AHFE 
International, Poland, pp. 553-566
10 Cameron M. H. (2015) The role and strategies for traffic 
policing in road safety, Submission to Inquiry into the 
methods employed by WA Police to evaluate performance, 
Community Development and Justice Standing Committee, 
Parliament of Western Australia
11 Cameron M. H. (2015) The role and strategies for traffic 
policing in road safety, Submission to Inquiry into the 
methods employed by WA Police to evaluate performance, 
Community Development and Justice Standing Committee, 
Parliament of Western Australia
12 Cameron M. H. (2015) The role and strategies for traffic 
policing in road safety, Submission to Inquiry into the 
methods employed by WA Police to evaluate performance, 
Community Development and Justice Standing Committee, 
Parliament of Western Australia
13	 Soole, David, Watson, Barry, & Fleiter, Judy (2014) A review 
of international speed enforcement policies and practices: 
Evidence-based recommendations for best practice. 
InLandry,S,Stanton,N,Vallicelli,A,&DiBucchianico,G(Eds.) 
Advances in Human Aspects of Transportation, Part I: 
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on 
Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics, AHFE 2014. AHFE 
International, Poland, pp. 553-566
14	 Mobile speed camera operations in other Australian 
jurisdictions: Research Report (2020). https://roadsafety.
transport.nsw.gov.au/downloads/msc-better-practice-
review-research-report.pdf
15	 Fleiter, J., & Watson, B. (2012). Automated speed 
enforcement in Australia: Recent examples of the influence 
of public opinion on program sustainability. Journal of the 
Australasian College of Road Safety, 43(3), 59-66.
16	 New South Wales Auditor-General’s Report (2011) 
Performance Audit. Improving Road Safety: Speed 
Cameras. Roads and Traffic Authority
17	 https://www.parifex.com/en/; https://redflex.com/solution/
halo/;
18	 https://www.jenoptik.com/products/road-safety/
19	 https://redflex.com/solution/halo/
20	 https://www.jenoptik.com/products/road-safety/speed-
enforcement
21	 https://redflex.com/solutions/lane-enforcement; https://
roadsafetygb.org.uk/news/camera-enforcement-of-red-x-
offences-begins/
22	 https://www.antai.gouv.fr/controle-automatise?lang=en
23	https://www.transport.nsw.gov.au/industry/nsw-movement-
and-place-framework
24	Speed Camera Programs: 2020 Annual Review. Transport 
for NSW, Centre for Road Safety. https://roadsafety.
transport.nsw.gov.au/downloads/2020-speed-camera-
review.pdf
25	Transport for NSW’s internal data systems for Mobile 
Phone Detection Cameras.
26	 Based on the COM-B model of behaviour change, and the 
Behaviour Change Wheel.
27	 The behavioural economics model ‘Hyperbolic discounting’.
28	Stephan, K., Stephens, A., & Newstead, S. (2019) Modelling 
the Potential Trauma Reductions of Automated Mobile 
Phone Enforcement in NSW: Final Report. MUARC. 
29	Kantar Colmar Brunton (2021) December results. 
Community Satisfaction with Camera Enforcement. 
Unpublished report for Transport for NSW
30	Ipsos Public Affairs (2021). 2026 Road Safety Action Plan: 
Community Attitudes. Prepared for the Centre for Road 
Safety, Transport for NSW.
31	 Transport for NSW data on Speed Camera Nominations via 
the Safer Roads website, three year average 2018-2020.
32 Testing customer perceptions and behaviour of new fines. 
August 2020. Unpublished report for the NSW Government
33	Davey, J. D. & Freeman, J. E. (2010). Improving road safety 
through deterrence-based initiatives: a review of research. 
Sultan Qaboos University Medical Journal

=== p.28 ===
© Transport for New South Wales
Users are welcome to copy, reproduce and 
distribute the information contained in this 
report for non-commercial purposes only, 
provided acknowledgement is given to 
Transport for NSW as the source.
