
=== p.1 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please refer to this document as: 
SafetyNet (2009) Speed Enforcement, retrieved <add date of retrieval here> 

=== p.2 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 2 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement................................................................................................................3 
1. 
General introduction to traffic law enforcement...........................................................4 
1.1 
Police enforcement as part of a systems approach .............................................4 
1.2 
From laws and policy, to increased enforcement, to social  benefits ...................4 
1.3 
General deterrence vs. specific deterrence.........................................................5 
1.4 
Targeted enforcement.........................................................................................6 
2. 
Speed enforcement ....................................................................................................6 
2.1 
Speed enforcement as part of a speed management policy................................6 
2.2 
Speed enforcement in relation to other road safety measures.............................7 
2.3 
General characteristics of effective speed enforcement ......................................7 
2.4 
Public support for speed enforcement.................................................................7 
3. 
Speed enforcement techniques and their effectiveness ..............................................8 
3.1 
Physical policing .................................................................................................8 
3.2 
Speed cameras...................................................................................................9 
3.3 
Average speed control ......................................................................................10 
3.4 
Concluding remarks ..........................................................................................11 
4. 
Additional considerations on speed enforcement......................................................11 
4.1 
Time and distance halo effects..........................................................................11 
4.2 
Regression-to-the-mean ...................................................................................12 
4.3 
Intrinsic vs. extrinsic motivation.........................................................................12 
5. 
Measures to support speed enforcement..................................................................13 
5.1 
Safe and credible speed limits ..........................................................................13 
5.2 
Publicity ............................................................................................................13 
5.3 
Facilitating legislation........................................................................................13 
5.4 
Appropriate sanctions .......................................................................................13 
6. 
Organization of speed enforcement..........................................................................14 
6.1 
Co-operation.....................................................................................................14 
6.2 
Performance, outcome and output measures....................................................15 
6.3 
Funding.............................................................................................................16 
6.4 
Possibilities for better organized enforcement in EU Member  States ...............17 
7. 
Best practice examples.............................................................................................18 
7.1 
United Kingdom ................................................................................................18 
7.2 
Australia and New Zealand ...............................................................................20 
8. 
Future possibilities for speed enforcement................................................................22 
8.1 
Relationships between speed enforcement and new  technologies...................22 
8.2 
Black box ..........................................................................................................23 
8.3 
Electronic Vehicle Identification (EVI)................................................................23 
8.4 
IntelIigent Speed Assistance (ISA)....................................................................23 
9. 
In conclusion: Ten Rules of speed enforcement .......................................................24 
References...........................................................................................................................25 

=== p.3 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 3 
 
Speed Enforcement 
 
Summary 
 
Traffic law enforcement  
Traffic law enforcement influences driving behaviour through two processes: general deterrence and 
specific deterrence. General deterrence can be described as the impact of the threat of legal 
punishment on the public at large. Specific deterrence can be seen as the impact of actual legal 
punishment on those who have been apprehended. 
 
Effectiveness and limitations of speed enforcement 
Generally, reviews report substantial positive effects of speed enforcement on both speeding 
behaviour and the number of crashes. The sizes of the reported effects of speed enforcement vary 
considerably. These differences most likely have to do with the type, intensity and location of the 
enforcement activities as well as the situation before the enforcement started.  
 
Methods of speed enforcement   
Speed enforcement is most effective when it is unpredictable and difficult to avoid, when there is a mix 
of highly visible and less visible activities, and when it is continued over a longer period of time. 
Furthermore, it is advisable to focus speed enforcement on roads, situations, and times where 
speeding is considered to affect the road safety level most.    
  
Measures to support speed enforcement 
Speed enforcement is not a stand-alone measure. To maximise its effect, it is best supported by other 
measures such as credible speed limits and publicity. It is also important that speed enforcement is 
embedded in a supportive framework of legislation and sanctions.  
 
Organization of speed enforcement 
Preferably, the police work together with partners to prepare, perform and evaluate (speed) 
enforcement activities. The main partners for the police are local road authorities, court officials, 
publicity organizations, and researchers. Local road authorities and researchers may assist the police 
in analysing the local road safety problem and determining priorities. Cooperation with court officials 
provides clarity about regulations for detecting and sentencing traffic offenders. Publicity organizations 
can organize supportive publicity programmes, in consultation with the police and the road authorities.   
  
Future possibilities 
New vehicle technology can be integrated in the system of enforcement. For example, electronic 
vehicle identification (EVI) can be made part of the enforcement system and support this system. 
When cars are equipped with black boxes, it is possible to enforce speeding at all times and places. 
On the long term, police enforcement as we know it may be largely replaced by new technological 
systems of speed control.  

=== p.4 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 4 
1. 
General introduction to traffic law enforcement 
1.1 
Police enforcement as part of a systems approach 
Countries that have successfully reduced road traffic risk have embraced a 'systems approach' to road 
safety. A systems approach looks at the traffic system as a whole and at the interaction between road, 
vehicle, and road user in order to identify where there is potential for intervention [52]. It recognises 
that human beings make errors and that the road traffic system needs to accommodate for these 
errors. Inspired by the Haddon Matrix (http://www.tsc.berkeley.edu/newsletter/winter05-06/haddon.pdf) 
[31], the “systems” approach seeks to identify and rectify the major sources of error or design 
weakness that contribute to fatal and severe injury crashes, as well as to mitigate the severity and 
consequences of injury by: 
• 
Reducing exposure to risk  
• 
Preventing road traffic crashes from occurring 
• 
Reducing the severity of injury in the event of a crash 
• 
Reducing the consequences of injury through improved post-collision care 
 
The Swedish Vision Zero [63] and the Dutch Sustainable Safety vision [66] are good examples of such 
a systems approach to road safety. 
 
Within the systems approach, traffic law enforcement is one of the instruments to secure or improve 
traffic law compliance. In the literature the concepts of ‘traffic law enforcement’ and ‘police 
enforcement’ are often used interchangeably. However, the concepts differ in width. Traffic law 
enforcement is wider and covers the entire enforcement chain, from detection of a violation through to 
the penalty. Police enforcement refers to the actual work of detecting a traffic law violation, 
apprehending the offender, and securing the evidence needed for his prosecution. Police enforcement 
can only be effective if it operates in a supportive environment of laws, regulations, and a sensitive 
penal system. Consequently, the effectiveness of police enforcement cannot be seen in isolation from 
how the police collaborate with the other parties in the traffic law enforcement chain.  
 
Within the area of police enforcement this web text focuses on speed enforcement. There are two 
reasons for this. First, the relationship between excess speed and unsafety is well-established and 
speed control is one of the major spearheads of road safety programmes world-wide. Second, speed 
enforcement merits special attention in view of the variety of policing methods used to prevent 
speeding violations and the continuing (technological) developments in this area. It should be kept in 
mind, however, that police traffic enforcement involves much more than just speed enforcement.  
1.2 
From laws and policy, to increased enforcement, to social 
 
benefits 
Yannis et al. [69] describe the hierarchy of road safety enforcement. The legal and organizational 
framework enabling police enforcement provides the foundation for the actual policing operations. 
Such a framework will result in well-planned, intensified police controls on selected locations of the 
road network, resulting in an increase in the perceived risk of apprehension. As a result violation rates 
will decrease. Changes in road user behaviour will result in less traffic crashes and less traffic victims, 
and in reduced monetary costs for society (social benefits). The figure below describes this ideal 
scenario.  
 
 

=== p.5 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 5 
 
Figure 1: The hierarchy of road safety enforcement. Source: Yannis et al. (2004) 
 
Rule 1: 
To maximize the road safety effects, traffic law enforcement should first and foremost prevent 
violations that are proven to be related with the number or severity of crashes.  
1.3 
General deterrence vs. specific deterrence 
It is generally accepted that traffic law enforcement influences driving behaviour through two 
processes: general deterrence and specific deterrence [71][44]. General deterrence can be defined as 
the impact of the threat of legal punishment on the public at large. Specific deterrence can be seen as 
the impact of the actual legal punishment on those who are apprehended. Thus, general deterrence 
results from the perception of the public that traffic laws are enforced and that there is a risk of 
detection and punishment when traffic laws are violated. Specific deterrence results from actual 
experiences with detection, prosecution, and punishment of offenders. 
 
The general assumption underlying police enforcement is that it should primarily aim at general 
deterrence, which is first and foremost achieved by increasing the subjective risk of apprehension. The 
subjective risk of apprehension, and hence the effectiveness of police enforcement, is larger if police 
enforcement is [26]:  
• 
Accompanied by publicity 
• 
Unpredictable and difficult to avoid 
• 
A mix of highly visible and less visible activities  
• 
Primarily focused on times and locations with high violation (maximum feedback to potential 
offenders) 
• 
Continued over a longer period of time 
 
These general principles may need further region-specific tailoring to account for regional differences 
with regard to violation levels, road network status, and sometimes even social norms. Research has 
shown regional differences in the effectiveness of police enforcement [32][70]. 

=== p.6 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 6 
1.4 
Targeted enforcement  
In major reviews [44][22][48] it has been concluded that enforcement targeted at a limited number of 
high risk violations is more effective in reducing road crashes than non-targeted general enforcement. 
There are various reasons:  
• 
Organizational: Given the limited amount of manpower and equipment of police, the enforcement 
managers will always aim to get maximum value from scarce resources. Focusing on a limited 
number of high risk violations is more efficient than a non-focused general enforcement approach 
• 
Road safety: Focusing on one or more high risk violations such as speeding, drink driving, seat 
belt use and red light running is also justifiable given the scientific evidence of the relationships 
between these violations and road safety risk; 
• 
Communication: it is easier to communicate to road users about a limited and specific number of 
violations than about traffic violations in general. 
2. 
Speed enforcement 
2.1 
Speed enforcement as part of a speed management policy  
Speed is at the core of the road safety problem. There is a strong relationship between speed and 
both the number of crashes and the severity of the consequences of a crash. If the number of 
speeding violations on European roads could be reduced, many lives would be saved (for more 
information, see the ERSO text on speeding).  
 
There is no single solution to the problem of excess and inappropriate speeds. A package of 
countermeasures is necessary, increasing the effectiveness of each individual measure [49]. Police 
enforcement is one of the countermeasures. The most appropriate combination of measures is 
determined by the circumstances. Wegman & Aarts [66] propose an integrated, systematic and 
stepwise approach to speed management:  
 
Step 1: Setting speed limits 
A speed limit needs to reflect the safe speed on that particular road, related to road function, traffic 
composition, and road design characteristics. Furthermore, a speed limit needs to be credible, i.e. it 
must be logical in the light of the characteristics of the road and the road environment. 
 
Step 2: Information about the speed limit 
The driver must know the actual speed limit, always and everywhere. This can be done by either by 
the use of consistent roadside signing and road markings, or by the use of in-vehicle systems that 
inform drivers about the speed limit in force. 
 
Step 3: Road engineering measures 
At particular locations low speeds are crucial for safety. Examples are near schools or homes for the 
elderly, at pedestrian crossings, at intersections. At these locations, physical speed reducing 
measures such as speed humps, road narrowings and roundabouts can help to ensure cars 
maintaining a safe speed. 
 
Step 4: Police enforcement to control the intentional speeder  
If steps 1 to 3 have been applied, unintentional speed violations will have become an exception. 
Drivers who then still exceed the speed limit, do so intentionally. Police enforcement will remain 
necessary to control and punish that group of drivers. 
 
Each of the steps 1 to 4 has to be accompanied by information to drivers on the problem of speed and 
speeding, what the speed limit system is based on and why, what additional measures have been 
taken and why, and on the (positive) outcomes of these measures. 

=== p.7 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 7 
2.2 
Speed enforcement in relation to other road safety measures 
Preferably, a road safety philosophy not only specifies possible road safety measures, but also 
specifies how different road safety measures, including road design, setting speed limits, enforcement, 
etc. are related to one another in a logical and hierarchical manner, and when and where certain 
measures must be taken, rather than others. For example, according to the Dutch Sustainable Safety 
vision, speed enforcement should always be considered in combination with other speed management 
measures. It should only be carried out when speeding demonstrably contributes to a bad safety 
record of a road, and when other measures (such as setting safe and credible speed limits, changing 
the road infrastructure, providing road users with adequate information about limits on road sections) 
are not possible or insufficient to make road users comply with the speed limits.  
 
Research informs us that different measures can be effective in controlling speed. For example, 
Mountain, Hirst and Maher [46] compared speed and safety effects of engineering measures and 
enforcement by fixed speed cameras. Using a study design that controlled for trends in crashes, 
regression-to-the mean effects and changes in traffic volume, they found that engineering schemes 
including vertical deflections (speed humps, cushions) prevented 44% of personal injury crashes. 
Furthermore, they found that engineering schemes with horizontal features resulted in a decrease of 
29% in personal injury crashes and speed cameras reduced the personal injury crashes by 22%.  
 
The idea behind an integrated speed management approach is to seek for the best possible synergies 
between the various individual measures. Isolated measures will have an impact but are most likely 
not the most effective way to achieve a durable reduction in speed [49]. 
 
Rule 2: 
To achieve collective safety benefits by reducing speeds, a systematic, integrated speed management 
policy is necessary. Speed enforcement is one of the elements of an integrated speed management 
approach. 
2.3 
General characteristics of effective speed enforcement  
The general characteristics of traffic law enforcement, as discussed previously, can easily be 
translated to the specific domain of speed enforcement.  
 
The most important requirement for speed enforcement is that it deters drivers from speeding; not only 
those drivers that have been apprehended for a speeding violation, but even more so, those who have 
not. This is called general deterrence. General deterrence is closely related to the risk of being caught 
as subjectively perceived by a driver. This subjective risk of apprehension can not only be increased 
by stepping up the intensity of actual speed enforcement, but also by making sure that, independent of 
the exact enforcement method, the speed enforcement activities are well-publicised, unpredictable 
and unavoidable, and sustained over a longer period of time. 
  
Furthermore, for a maximum effect, it is advisable to focus the speed enforcement operations on 
roads, situations, and times where speeding is considered to have the largest effect on the road safety 
level. Ideally, the enforcement operations are based on a thorough analysis of crashes and the role of 
speeding therein. 
 
Rule 3: 
Speed enforcement gains in effectiveness if it is targeted towards prioritised roads, situations and 
times.  
2.4 
Public support for speed enforcement 
According to the SARTRE survey [55] the public support for traffic enforcement in general and for 
speed enforcement in particular is high. The survey interviewed over 23,000 car drivers in 23 
European countries to determine opinions and behaviours in traffic. It showed that:  
• 
Three quarters (76%) of all interviewed EU drivers are in favour of increased enforcement of traffic 
rules 

=== p.8 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 8 
• 
Two-thirds (66%) of EU drivers are very or fairly much in favour of the use of automated speed 
cameras 
• 
Three out of five (60%) EU drivers support higher penalties for speeding offences. 
 
Since the SARTRE survey clearly concentrates on traffic safety issues, the respondents may have 
been tempted to give socially desirable answers. How would the public evaluate the speeding problem 
when it is compared with other social problems like crime? In that case, would there be less 
enthusiasm for speed management and speed enforcement? To answer this question Poulter and 
McKenna [53] examined the public perceptions of antisocial behaviours including speeding in traffic. 
The data was collected as part of the British Crime Survey, a face-to-face interview with UK residents 
on issues relating to crime. The section on antisocial behaviour required participants to state the 
degree to which they perceived 16 antisocial behaviours to be a problem in their area. Results 
revealed that speeding traffic was considered as the largest problem in local communities, regardless 
of whether respondents were male or female, young, middle aged, or old. The rating of speeding traffic 
as the largest problem in the community was replicated in a second, smaller postal survey, in which 
respondents also provided strong support for enforcement on residential roads, and indicated that 
travelling just above the speed limit on residential roads was unacceptable. 
 
Even though these results suggest that speed enforcement is widely supported by the public, it is also 
a topic that evokes strong public and even political debate, in particular about the use of automatic 
speed cameras. Common complaints are that mostly minor offenders are caught, that it is not 
impartial, and that it is just used to fill the regional or national treasury. In other words, the credibility of 
traffic enforcement requires special attention and is one of the quality aspects of enforcement. 
Experience shows that speed camera enforcement programmes require clear and transparent rules to 
ensure public acceptability. The credibility of speed enforcement may be increased by setting credible 
speed limits, by policy guarantees that exclude profit considerations as a motive for enforcement 
actions, and by communication about the reasons for enforcement and positive behaviour and safety 
outcomes. 
 
Rule 4:  
The credibility of traffic enforcement should be part of enforcement policy and is to be considered as 
an important quality aspect of enforcement.  
3. 
Speed enforcement techniques and their effectiveness 
There are two main methods of speed enforcement. The first one is to check drivers alongside the 
road and stop offenders. In the literature this is often called stationary enforcement or physical 
policing. Physical policing makes use of manned (visible or invisible) observation unit and a manned 
(visible) apprehension unit where the offenders are stopped. When physical policing is randomised in 
time and location over a large part of the road network, this type of enforcement is called random road 
watch or network-wide random enforcement. 
 
The second method is to detect speed offenders by means of a speed camera and to send them a fine 
or a notification by mail. Speed cameras can be used fulltime at fixed locations (fixed cameras) or can 
be rotated over different locations (mobile cameras). Speed cameras can operate automatically 
(unmanned) or as part of a manned control (either in a visible or in a hidden car or van). 
3.1 
Physical policing 
Physical policing has both advantages and disadvantages. The advantages are related to the fact that 
violators are immediately stopped by the police:  
• 
The violator is given immediate feedback 
• 
The police officer has the opportunity to explain why they are enforcing speed 
• 
If violators are stopped at a spot which is clearly visible to other drivers, the subjective chance of 
apprehension is increased 
 
The disadvantage is that physical policing is far more labour-intensive and that it is virtually impossible 
to reach the same enforcement level as with speed cameras. Hence the objective chance of 

=== p.9 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 9 
apprehension is much smaller. This is particularly true for speed enforcement by a patrolling police 
car. A patrolling police car follows the traffic stream and therefore has a relatively small chance of 
detecting a speed violator. If it does, it needs to follow that car for a sufficiently long time to determine 
the level of speeding reliably. Zaidel [72] criticizes conventional manpower-using methods of police 
enforcement of speed as being (too) selective, sporadic, inconsistent, and in the end, being rather 
expensive and ineffective. 
 
In contrast to the foregoing criticism by Zaidel [71], there is evidence that even with time-consuming 
conventional manpower-using methods effective speed control over large areas is possible. A specific 
type of physical policing is the network-wide random enforcement or Random Road Watch (RRW). 
This is an enforcement resource management technique that randomly schedules levels of police 
enforcement with the aim of realizing long-term, widespread coverage of a road network. Violators are 
stopped by the police. Newstead et al.[47] evaluated an RRW programme in Queensland, Australia, 
applying a quasi-experimental study design and Poisson regression statistical analysis techniques. 
The estimated effects appeared to be largest on fatal crashes, with an estimated reduction of 31% on 
the roads included in the programme. The effects were smaller for less severe crashes. The effects 
became larger as time increased after the programme introduction. In the third year of the programme, 
savings, at state level, were some 12% on crashes of all severities and some 15% on the fatal road 
crashes. The cost benefit/cost ratio for the programme was estimated to be 55:1. 
3.2 
Speed cameras  
Speed camera enforcement is most appropriate if crashes are clearly concentrated on specific road 
sections and are related to excess speed, and when the volume of traffic makes physical policing a 
time-consuming, less effective approach.  
 
The best estimate is that automatic camera enforcement results in a crash reduction of 15 to 20% [19]. 
Individual evaluation studies differ widely in the reported effects. The actual effectiveness depends on 
many factors, such as the actual enforcement effort, the initial speed and safety level and the type and 
amount of supporting publicity. 
 
Without having the pretension to be complete, Table 1 presents the findings of a number of studies of 
the effectiveness of different speed camera techniques.  

=== p.10 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 10 
 
Road type 
Method type 
Effect on crashes   
Study and country 
Urban  
Fixed speed cameras 
Minus 28%, all crashes 
Elvik & Vaa (2004) 
Meta-analysis 
worldwide 
Rural 
Fixed speed cameras 
Minus 18%, all crashes  
(* corrected estimate, not 
mentioned in original 
report) 
Elvik & Vaa (2004) 
Meta-analysis 
worldwide 
Urban 
Fixed speed cameras 
Minus 22%, personal 
injury collisions 
Gains et al. (2005) UK 
Urban 
Mobile speed cameras 
Minus 22%, personal 
injury collisions 
Gains et al. (2005) UK 
Rural 
Fixed speed cameras 
Minus 33%, personal 
injury collisions 
Gains et al. (2005) UK 
Rural 
Mobile speed cameras 
Minus15%, personal 
injury collisions 
Gains et al. (2005)  UK 
Rural 
Fixed speed cameras 
Minus 20%, injury 
crashes 
Elvik (1997)  Norway 
Rural 
Mobile hidden speed 
cameras 
Minus 21%, injury 
crashes involving a motor 
vehicle  
Goldenbeld & Van 
Schagen (2006) 
Netherlands 
Highways 
Mobile speed cameras 
Minus 25%, daytime 
unsafe speed related 
crashes 
Chen (2000)  Canada 
Highways 
Hidden speed cameras 
(*extra effect above 
visible cameras) 
Minus 11%, all crashes 
Keall et al. (2001) New 
Zealand 
Table 1 Overview crash reduction effects studies speed enforcement 
 
It can be seen in Table 1 that favourable results have been obtained both with visible cameras [16][25] 
and with hidden cameras [29][38]. 
 
Whether visible or invisible cameras should be preferred depends upon different considerations. For 
example, if it is very important that road users lower their speed on a specific section of the road, e.g. 
because of an intersection or a nearby school, it is more effective to have a visible speed camera, 
preferably accompanied by a warning sign. On the other hand, hidden cameras, and in particular 
hidden mobile cameras make speed checks less predictable. Hidden (mobile) speed cameras are 
often accompanied by a warning sign. This approach may increase the preventative effect, since 
drivers know that there is a chance of detection but they do not know when and where exactly. 
Whereas nearly every driver keeps within the speed limit when a camera is clearly visible, a small 
percentage of drivers may still violate the limit when they drive on a road with hidden cameras. On the 
other hand, clearly visible speed cameras drivers may tempt drivers to speed up again a few hundred 
metres after the camera, while they may be less tempted to violate the speed limit when they are 
aware of the possibility of a hidden camera check. 
3.3 
Average speed control  
Average speed control (also called ‘section control’ or ‘point-to-point’ control) is a relatively new speed 
enforcement technique. Average speed control systems measure the average speed over a road 
section (usually 2 – 5 km). The vehicle is identified when entering the enforcement section, and again 
when leaving it. The average speed can be calculated based on the time interval between these two 
points.  
 
Average speed control works 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, which means the chance of being 
caught is close to 100 percent. On a stretch of road where average speed control is employed, most 
drivers obey the speed limit. On sections where speed limits were frequently exceeded in the past, 

=== p.11 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 11 
average speed control can bring back the number of offences to a few percent, or even less than one 
percent.   
 
Average speed control is still fairly new, not yet widely applied and not yet evaluated on a substantial 
scale. In Austria, Stefan [58] evaluated the use of average speed control on an 80 km/h motorway 
stretch running through a tunnel. In its first year of operation, a reduction in average speed by more 
than 10 km/h was recorded. Stefan estimated that after two years of operation average speed control 
reduced injury crashes by 33.3% and fatal and serious injuries by 48.8%. Taking into account both 
effects on road safety and road traffic emissions, Stefan computed a cost-benefit ratio of average 
speed control of 1:5.3. Positive results with section control were also obtained in the Netherlands. It 
was found that average speed control reduced the number of speed offenders to less than 1% at an 
enforced section of motorway [54]. 
3.4 
Concluding remarks 
Generally, reviews report substantial positive effects of speed enforcement on both speeding 
behaviour and the number of crashes [22][51] [71][72]. However, the effects of speed enforcement are 
by no means as clear cut as one would like. The sizes of the reported effects of speed enforcement, 
for instance, vary considerably. For example, Pilkington & Kinra [51]  found that evaluation studies 
reported that the crash and casualty reduction in immediate vicinity of the speed camera locations 
varied between 5 and 69% for crashes, between 12 and 65% for injuries and between 17 and 71% for 
fatalities. These differences probably are influenced by the type, intensity and location of the 
enforcement activities as well as by the situation before the enforcement started.  
 
A recent TRL study [15] reviewed the literature on police enforcement. With respect to speed 
enforcement the review concludes that: 
• 
Speed cameras are more effective than physical policing methods in reducing speeds and 
crashes 
• 
Speed cameras are more effective in reducing crashes inside urban areas than on rural roads 
• 
Fixed speed cameras are more effective in reducing speeds and crashes than mobile speed 
cameras 
 
Rule 5:  
Speed camera enforcement should be used for a large concentration of traffic crashes at high-volume 
traffic locations. Physical policing can be a good alternative to safety camera enforcement when 
crashes are scattered, and provided operations are randomised and applied to a large part of the 
network. 
4. 
Additional considerations on speed enforcement  
Despite the positive findings about speed enforcement mentioned in the previous section we need to 
be aware of a number of potential limitations of speed enforcement.  
4.1 
Time and distance halo effects  
The one common finding in the literature is that automatic speed enforcement effects are limited in 
terms of both time [64] and space [10] [36]. ‘Time halo’ can be defined as the length of time that the 
effects of enforcement on drivers’ speed behaviour continue after the enforcement operations have 
been ended. ‘Distance halo’ is defined as the distance over which the effects of an enforcement 
operation last after a driver passed the enforcement site.  
 
Physical policing 
With regard to time halo, the effects of physical policing methods vary largely, ranging from effects 
lasting 1 hour to up to 8 weeks after the police activity has ceased [15]. It was also found that less than 
6 days of police activity at a given location will have little or no time halo effect after the enforcement 
effort has been stopped. With regard to distance halo, Elliott and Broughton [15] conclude that: 
• 
The effects of visible and stationary policing on driving speeds are halved for every 900 metres 
downstream of the enforcement site 

=== p.12 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 12 
• 
The effects of police presence on driving speeds typically last between 2.4 and 8 km 
• 
Police enforcement can have considerable larger distance halo effects (e.g. up to 22 km), if 
visible, stationary enforcement is used randomly on a large part of the road network, as such 
suggesting a large scale enforcement effort and high unpredictability of checks. 
 
Speed cameras  
• 
A few studies indicate that 500 metres is about the maximum distance halo of a speed camera. 
More studies, however, indicate a much larger distance halo effect, even up to 10 km [15]. 
• 
Larger distance halo effects seem to be associated with physical policing, especially if the policing 
method is ‘randomised’. The minimum distance halo effect found at speed camera sites (500 m) is 
almost five times smaller than the minimum distance halo effect of physical policing (2.4 km) [15]  
• 
When the roads are checked by 24-hour operating speed cameras, the effects on speed and 
safety are larger in sections within 1 km of the camera site than sections within 2 km [34].  
• 
When visible and invisible mobile camera operations are used the effects are more widespread 
over the road network [39]  
• 
The effects of visible camera operations along the road side tend to dissipate after 3 days [14]. 
4.2 
Regression-to-the-mean  
Some critics of speed cameras have specifically argued that crash reductions found at speed camera 
sites are an overestimation, since they include regression-to-the-mean effects. The regression-to-the-
mean effect is the statistical phenomenon that roads with a high number of crashes in a particular 
period are likely to have fewer during the following period, even if no measures are taken; this is just 
because of random fluctuations in crash numbers. Since speed enforcement often takes place at 
roads with large numbers of crashes, the effects of the intervention may be overestimated if there is no 
appropriate statistical control. 
 
However, research by Gorell and Sexton [30] showed that also after controlling for regression-to-the-
mean, the estimated reduction in all injury collisions due to 77 speed cameras in London was 12%, 
and the reduction in fatal and serious injury crashes 21%. Similarly, after correction for regression-to-
the-mean, Mountain et al.[46] found that, within a distance of 250 metres of the speed cameras, the 
overall effect of a sample of 62 speed cameras was a 25% reduction in all injury crashes.  
4.3 
Intrinsic vs. extrinsic motivation  
Psychologists have pointed out that speed enforcement is essentially an extrinsic motivational 
approach that relies on negative, external factors like fear of punishment, to change drivers' speed 
behaviour. It would diminish the intrinsic motivation of drivers to conform to the law, i.e. because they 
want to. The use of punishment instead of reward can be considered as a one-sided psychological 
approach. 
 
Ideally, traffic enforcement is supported by social norms in a society. Visible police enforcement 
operations then ‘remind’ road users of the importance of rules and urge them to comply with traffic 
rules. Whereas, at first, rule compliance may be extrinsically motivated by the aim to avoid 
punishment, later on drivers may actually change their personal belief about what is the right 
behaviour and internalise traffic rules.  
 
Over the last four decades, under the combined influences of new laws, police enforcement, and 
public communication campaigns, many drivers worldwide have come to accept the rule ‘no drinking 
and driving’ as a strict, personal norm. This positive development towards an intrinsic motivation for a 
traffic rule is probably more difficult to achieve for speeding behaviour. For many drivers, the relation 
between personal speeding and crash risk is less evident than the relation between alcohol and crash 
risk. More information about the effect of speed on crash and crash severity may help to increase the 
intrinsic motivation to comply with the speed limit. 

=== p.13 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 13 
5. 
Measures to support speed enforcement 
Speed enforcement is not a stand-alone measure. To maximize its effect and acceptance, it is best 
supported by other measures such as credible speed limits and publicity. It is also important that 
speed enforcement is embedded in a supportive framework of legislation and sanctions. 
5.1 
Safe and credible speed limits 
To invoke road users to keep to the speed limits, it is essential that these limits are safe and credible. 
A credible limit means that it is considered logical by the road user, i.e. the limit corresponds to the 
expectations that a road's layout and traffic environment evoke. Whereas the idea may not be new 
and many countries have such a requirement in their speed limit regulations, there seems to be 
substantial room for improvement.  
 
Correspondence between speed limits and road layout can be realised by fitting the layout to the limit 
or the limit to the layout. On some roads the limit may need to be raised, whereas on others it may 
need to be lowered. Another important consequence of the concept of credible limits is that at a place 
where one limit changes to another one, as for example is the case when leaving an urban area, road 
users should always be able to see a clear change in road layout. The ERSO text on Speeding gives 
further details about credible speed limits.  
5.2 
Publicity 
The effect of speed enforcement, as indeed of all traffic enforcement activities is substantially 
increased if it is supported by targeted information to the road user [68]. The communication with road 
users should:  
• 
Emphasize that safety is the goal of the enforcement activities 
• 
Explain how and why speeding leads to more and more severe crashes 
• 
Explain the enforcement method and procedures 
• 
Preferably illustrate that the revenues of fines are used for the benefit of local road safety 
• 
Provide feedback on the interim and final results of the enforcement activity, either in terms of 
traffic behaviour or safety. 
5.3 
Facilitating legislation 
Legislation is the basis for traffic enforcement. Legislation not only determines what regulations are 
enforced, but also how they can be enforced. This is particularly true for automatic speed 
enforcement. In some countries, it is the driver who is legally responsible for an offence (e.g. Finland, 
Germany, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland). This means that the automatic camera has to identify 
the driver in order to prosecute a violation. Generally, this requires a photograph of both the vehicle 
number plate and the driver. In other countries, the vehicle owner is held responsible for an offence 
(e.g. Belgium, Italy, France, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom). In these countries, a photograph of 
the licence plate from the rear is sufficient. This is technically easier and less expensive. An additional 
benefit of the vehicle owner being responsible is that also speeding motorcyclists can be fined. 
5.4 
Appropriate sanctions  
Sanctions are considered to be an essential element of effective enforcement. The possibility of a 
sanction ascertains the deterrent effect of enforcement. Despite the essential role, the effects of 
sanctions are still fairly unknown. It has been argued that in order to be effective, sanctions must be 
based on certainty and be imposed with minimal delay [71][28]. The argument of immediacy of 
punishment is deduced from the scientific field of learning theories and behaviouristic animal 
experiments. In practical terms, there is no evidence that instantly imposed sanctions (within a few 
days) are more effective than sanctions imposed with a short delay of one or several weeks.  
 
Another issue is the height of the fine. An overview of the literature [44] did not reveal consistent 
results on the effects of increasing punishment severity.  More recently, Elvik and Christensen [20] 
evaluated the effects of increase of fixed speed and seat belt penalties in Norway. They could not find 
an effect on speeding. For seat belt wearing, however, they found an increase in wearing rate. The 

=== p.14 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 14 
authors suggest that the positive effect of penalties on seat belt use may partly be due to the increase 
in seat belt enforcement in Norway in the same period. The absence of any effect on speeding is 
attributed to the fact that the objective risk of apprehension is quite low on most parts of the road 
network. These findings suggest that increasing penalties may improve compliance with traffic rules, 
but only when the risk of apprehension is high. When the risk of apprehension is low, increasing fixed 
penalties does not make a noticeable difference for deterrence.  
Although, as a general rule, the use of sanctions is necessary to achieve compliance, alternatives 
should much more be considered. In a Finnish experiment, it has been shown that stopping drivers 
and issuing them a speeding ticket was not more effective than a warning letter sent by mail [43]. Both 
a warning letter and a fine resulted in decreased speeds of sanctioned drivers of 9 to 10 km/h for a 
period of at least three months.  
 
A survey study in the UK [5] indicated that drivers respond differently to speeding fines. Three 
separate groups were identified, whose size could be estimated: 
• 
Those who now drive more slowly, including both at camera sites and elsewhere: 41 - 56% 
• 
Those who now only slow down at camera sites, but not elsewhere: 30 - 32% 
• 
Those not doing either: 14 - 15% 
 
Thus, approximately one half the respondents were more speed sensitive soon after receipt of 
punishment, one third were more camera sensitive, and one sixth were neither. Punishment, in the 
form of a £60 fine and 3 penalty points, had a specific deterrent function for some drivers, but left 
others unremediated. 
 
Rule 6:  
To increase its effectiveness, speed enforcement must be supported by setting safe and credible 
speed limits, by publicity, by legislation facilitating effective enforcement, and by appropriate sanctions.
 
Rule 7:  
Alternatives to negative sanctions (such as warning letters, educational courses, speed limiters) and 
the further development of these sanctions merit serious consideration of authorities, practitioners and 
researchers. 
6. 
Organization of speed enforcement 
6.1 
Co-operation  
Enforcement projects work best when they are targeted at dangerous road sections or dangerous road 
behaviour, are accompanied by various publicity and communication activities, and when they result in 
swift and appropriate penalties for traffic offenders. In order to maximize the potential of traffic law 
enforcement, the police must work together with various authorities and agencies to prepare, perform 
and evaluate (speed) enforcement activities.   
 
The main partners for the police are the local road authorities, court officials, publicity organizations, 
and researchers. Local road authorities and researchers may assist the police in analysing the local 
road safety problem and setting priorities. Cooperation with court officials or public prosecution officials 
is necessary in order to have clarity about the guidelines for detection and sentencing of traffic 
offenders and the capacity to process a larger number of traffic offenders. Publicity organizations can 
organize special publicity programmes around the new enforcement project, but they will need to 
discuss the choices for the most effective media campaign strategy with police and local road 
authorities.   
 
Ideally, co-operation between police and partners is grounded on a well-prepared plan that outlines 
agreements, task division, and shared and separate responsibilities. Goldenbeld et al. [28] put forth 
the following list of topics to be included in such an enforcement plan:  
• 
A clear description of the aims and targets to be achieved by the enforcement activities 
• 
Clear agreements with other parties, e.g. regional and local road safety authorities, municipalities, 
Department of Justice, fine handling authority, etc.  

=== p.15 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 15 
• 
Consideration of which groups of road users the publicity or enforcement activity can be 
specifically targeted at 
• 
The support of enforcement activities by additional measures alongside the road such as adding 
or placing road signs or road markings or making them more visible 
• 
A sensible choice of locations and times of enforcement operations 
• 
Consideration of the best mix between highly visible police checks and more unexpected, less 
visible controls 
• 
The set-up and execution of police checks according to time saving operational guidelines  
• 
A well-considered build-up and build-down of activities over a longer period of time 
• 
The choice of publicity strategy and message and publicity channels, including the informing the 
police officers involved in executing the enforcement operations 
• 
Evaluation of the extent to which agreements are fulfilled and the extent to which expected effects 
of enforcement activities have been realised. 
 
The agreements mentioned above necessitate the availability of good performance, outcome and 
output measures. The next section discusses this topic.  
6.2 
Performance, outcome and output measures  
Police organizations have their own administrative recording system for policing activities. These days, 
increasing pressure is put upon police managers to justify the use of policing resources. Ideally, the 
monitoring system of policing activities provides data and arguments for this. For traffic enforcement 
and speed enforcement, a monitoring system should be aimed at showing relationships between 
policing resources (performance), effects on traffic behaviour, speed, (outcome) and, ultimately, 
effects on road safety (outcome). We can distinguish between performance measures and outcome 
measures [60]. Performance measures define what the police actually do on the streets, i.e.: how 
often, for how long and on which locations do they check speeding behaviour? Outcome measures 
should reflect the effects of enforcement on behaviour and on the consequences of behaviour, in the 
case of traffic enforcement, such as traffic crashes.  
 
A further distinction can be made between outcome and output measures (Footnote; Swadley & 
McInerney do not make this distinction and list a number of infringements as an outcome measure). 
Outcome measures refer to intended outcomes, i.e. safer behaviour. ‘Output’ measures refer to 
administrative outcomes generated by policing activities such as for instance the number of tickets or 
the number of court cases that are a result of policing activities, but are not the main aim of these 
activities. Goldenbeld [27] argues that output measures such as the number of speed fines cannot be 
seen as a good indicator of the effectiveness or quality of police enforcement. Although there may be 
good administrative reasons to keep track of these data, the data is not very informative as to the 
quality of speed enforcement. Tables 2 and 3 provide the performance measures for speed cameras 
and non-camera operations as proposed by Swadley and McInerney [60]. 

=== p.16 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 16 
 
Speed camera activity 
Exposure measure 
Number of vehicles checked 
 
 
Per 10.000 registered vehicles 
Per 100.000 population in the area 
Per 100 million vehicle kilometres travelled 
Per traffic count data at location 
Total hours of enforcement 
Per 10.000 registered vehicles 
Per 100.000 population in the area 
Per 100 million vehicle kilometres travelled 
Percentage of vehicles exceeding the speed limit 
or the enforcement limit 
 
Against traffic count data at location 
Against speed monitor data for location 
The number of separate speed checks 
(note: a speed check refers to camera operation 
for a certain time on a certain location; during 
one speed check several vehicles are checked) 
Per 10.000 registered vehicles 
Per 100.000 population in the area 
Per 100 million vehicle kilometres travelled 
The number of locations for speed checks 
Per 10.000 registered vehicles 
Per 100.000 population in the area 
Per 100 million vehicle kilometres travelled 
Hours per camera and total hours all cameras 
 
Table 2. Speed camera performance measures (Source: Swadley & McInerney, 1999) 
 
Non-camera  activity 
Exposure measure 
The number of personnel and hours of general 
traffic duty (including speed enforcement) 
Per 10.000 registered vehicles 
Per 100.000 population in the area 
Per 100 million vehicle kilometres travelled 
Per traffic count data at location 
Kilometres travelled by marked police vehicles 
 
Per 10.000 registered vehicles 
Per 100.000 population in the area 
Per 100 million vehicle kilometres travelled 
 
Kilometres travelled by unmarked police vehicles 
engaged in speeding enforcement activity 
Per 10.000 registered vehicles 
Per 100.000 population in the area 
Per 100 million vehicle kilometres travelled 
Table 3. Non-speed camera performance measures (Source: Swadley & McInerney, 1999) 
 
The most direct form of outcome measurement is speed itself. Data from speed cameras is of limited 
use to evaluate effects on speed behaviour since it can be assumed that drivers will become familiar 
with camera sites and will alter their normal speed behaviour. Covert speed monitoring which is not 
connected with enforcement activities is necessary to obtain true and valid data on speed behaviour 
when enforcement activities are not present. 
 
The SafetyNet report Safety Performance Indicators: Theory provides further detail on the method to 
set up reliable speed measurement. 
 
Rule 8:  
Speed enforcement operations gain in effectiveness if they have specified objectives and success 
criteria, and are monitored in terms of both process and product.  
6.3 
Funding 
It is important that the public does not (falsely) perceive that fine revenues are the main aim of 
enforcement activities. This decreases public and political support for speed enforcement and can on 
the long term lower the effectiveness of speed checks. To avoid the public misperception that speed 
checks are performed for financial reasons, one would need: 
• 
Clear rules stating that speed checks may only be performed at locations with above average 
numbers of crashes and where speed can be assumed to be a contributory factor to the crashes 
• 
A transparent accounting of cost and fines generated by enforcement programmes 

=== p.17 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 17 
• 
The possibility to invest the financial revenues exceeding the costs of the enforcement programme 
in traffic safety or traffic mobility measures. 
 
Speed enforcement programmes can, for example, be funded on a 'cost recovery' basis. This means 
that the police, local road authorities, research and publicity institutes who are involved in the 
programme are allowed to recover the costs of speed enforcement from the fine revenue. In general 
this includes equipment costs, enforcement and processing costs, as well as communication costs for 
public information campaigns aimed at changing driver behaviour.  
6.4 
Possibilities for better organized enforcement in EU Member 
 
States 
At the ESCAPE workshop on traffic law enforcement [44] consensus could be found on a list of 
priorities for better organized police traffic enforcement in the EU Member States: 
 
A strong role for the police as adviser in traffic affairs  
The police are the ‘ears and eyes’ of society, also in the field of traffic where the police develop very 
practical knowledge of how the traffic system actually works. Many traffic and enforcement problems 
may be avoided in the first place if traffic police is consulted in advance about infrastructural changes, 
planning of special events etc.  
 
Quantitative targets 
Setting targets is necessary to motivate, steer and evaluate police activities.  
 
Solid criteria for planning of enforcement activities 
Given scarce resources of traffic police there should be good criteria on which to base decisions about 
allocation of these resources to enforcement activities.  
 
Yearly monitoring of traffic behaviours 
Besides crash data, behavioural data provides input for planning of enforcement activities. Also, the 
targets for the traffic police may be behavioural targets, e.g. 85% of the front-seat occupants wear seat 
belts inside built-up areas.  
 
Crash registration quality 
Crash data is the most widely used and often only source of data that is used to plan, steer and 
evaluate police enforcement activities. Given this importance of crash data the quality of crash data 
registration should be a continuous concern for police, authorities and research institutes. 
 
Evaluation  
Evaluation of police enforcement activities is the only way to find out whether the activities were 
meaningful, successful, well planned, well-executed etc. Without evaluation of some kind, one cannot 
conclude anything about the value of the police activities.   
 
European knowledge body  
The knowledge gained from enforcement activities in some countries or in some regions should be 
freely available to every European force that wants to learn from the experience of others. For this 
purpose, it seems a good idea if there is some European body that collects the practical experience of 
various European police forces with enforcement activities and that makes this knowledge freely 
available by modern technological means (internet, electronic helpdesk etc.). 
 
Enforcement guidelines.  
It was pointed out that enforcement guidelines for police operations in the streets are very important 
for the quality of the actual police work. The organisation TISPOL is investigating whether European 
guidelines can be established. 
 
Clear responsibilities of parties involved in road safety or enforcement activities.  
The traffic police have a very specific responsibility in road safety or enforcement projects. However, 
other parties (road authorities, Government, crash-registration agency) are also involved in road safety 

=== p.18 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 18 
work. The specific responsibilities of the partners in a project should be clear. In the Czech Republic, 
for instance, the traffic police are almost solely held responsible for all matters involving road safety. 
Clearly, too much responsibility is loaded on the shoulders of one organisation. Well-defined 
responsibilities ensure that every partner can be specifically held accountable for a specific 
performance. It was indicated that the police should not only be adviser but also be held directly 
responsible for certain outcomes. 
 
There should also be qualitative targets, e.g. perceived environmental quality.  
Not all qualities can be measured objectively.  
7. 
Best practice examples  
This section presents two best practices in the field of police enforcement, one from the United 
Kingdom and one from Australia/New Zealand. These two practices have been chosen because the 
United Kingdom and Australia/New Zealand have demonstrably achieved good results with 
enforcement. Also, in both practices the success can be attributed to a continuing and close 
cooperation between police, local government, and researchers, with a consistent focus on improving 
enforcement practices and learning from the past rather than just continuing fixed routines. In several 
evaluation and policy reports the policing practices in United Kingdom and Australia/New Zealand 
have been clearly described.  
 
Best practices can show us what works well in a given system or context. However, it should be kept 
in mind that key elements of best practices are rooted in a specific legal, cultural and organizational 
tradition/context. It would be a mistake to assume that separate success elements of a strategy can 
simply be ‘copied’ to another country. Each country should for itself seek the best ways to apply or 
adapt the success factors in other countries to its own particular traffic system and traffic culture.  
 
Further best practices in the areas of speed and traffic enforcement can be found in Lynam et al.[42] 
OECD/ECMT [49] and SUPREME [61][62].  
7.1 
United Kingdom  
Organization 
In the UK, camera enforcement is organized by partnerships between police, local authorities and the 
court [12]. These partnerships not only look at speeding but also at red light running. The cameras are 
called safety cameras; the partnerships are called safety camera partnerships. The objectives of 
Safety Camera Partnerships are to reduce death and serious injury by reducing the level and severity 
of speeding and red light running. The aim is to do this by preventing, detecting and enforcing speed 
and red light offences using, but not limited to, camera technology and driver education programmes. 
Some partnerships also include road safety engineering as a method of contributing to the aim. The 
programme is part of the UK government's Road Safety Strategy that seeks a 40% reduction in 
fatalities and serious injuries by 2010 and a 50% reduction in fatalities and serious injuries of children 
(compared to the average of 1994-1998). 
 
Effects 
Gains et al. [25] evaluated the Safety Camera Partnerships in terms of driving speed and crashes. 
They included 38 areas where a Safety Camera Partnership had been running for at least one year. 
The main results were as follows: 
• 
Vehicle speeds went down. Vehicle speeds dropped by around 6% following the introduction of 
cameras. The number of cars exceeding the speed limit was reduced by 31%. At fixed camera 
sites this was 70%; at mobile camera sites 18%. The proportion of vehicles speeding excessively 
(i.e. by more than 15mph (24 km/h)) fell by 91% at fixed sites, and by 36% at mobile sites.  
• 
Both casualties and fatalities went down. After allowing for the long-term trend, but without 
allowing for selection effects (such as regression to the mean) there was a 22% reduction in 
personal injury collisions at camera sites; the number of fatalities and severely injured decreased 
by 42%. 

=== p.19 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 19 
• 
There was a positive cost-benefit of around 1:2.7. In the fourth year, the benefits to society from 
the avoided injuries were around £258 million ( 369 million) compared to enforcement costs of 
around £96 million ( 137 million). 
 
Success factors 
Success factors for the camera safety partnerships were [42]  
• 
Evaluation of both the effectiveness of management and financial control, and the effectiveness of 
crash reduction. 
• 
Extension of trial partnerships programmes to general implementation. 
• 
Sustained debate among researchers to establish conclusive evidence of effectiveness. 
 
Procedures and guidelines 
Each year, a Safety Camera Partnership has to submit its plans for the following year to the 
Department for Transport for approval. These plans detail the activities the Partnership proposes to 
undertake. Once being approved, the Partnership publishes its plans and makes sure that the location 
details of fixed cameras are made available to both the public and local media.  
 
The Department for Transport issues an annually updated handbook, which contains clear rules and 
guidelines covering where and how safety cameras should be placed, and measures to be taken to 
ensure that drivers are aware of them (published on Department for Transport under the Road safety 
area). The handbook states, for example, that fixed cameras must be located only at sites where there 
have been at least four crashes per km involving fatalities or seriously injured casualties in the last 
three years. Additional sites may be considered after all possible sites meeting this criterion have been 
dealt with. All safety cameras should be bright yellow to ensure maximum visibility. The Department 
for Transport is now undertaking a review governing the use of mobile speed cameras. The 
Association of Chief Police Officers has asked for the review because they think the current guidelines 
are too restrictive. One relaxation being considered is to extend the maximum distance covered by 
mobile camera sites from 5 km to 20 km.   
 
Funding mechanisms 
The Partnerships are funded on a 'cost recovery' basis through money raised from fines. This money 
is reinvested into the road safety camera programme. The partnerships will only be reimbursed 
enough to cover the programme costs, including facilities and equipment costs as well as public 
information campaigns. The remaining fine revenues go to the National Treasury. The Partnerships do 
not make a profit; they have been set up as a transparent way of taking the funds from fines and using 
them to prevent collisions. There is no incentive to place cameras other than to improve road safety.  
 
Public acceptance 
Local and national surveys conducted during the Partnership programme showed a generally positive 
attitude by the public to the use of safety cameras for targeted enforcement. However, there is an 
indication of some decline in support [42] (Table 4). The Department for Transport has responded by 
providing information on its website clarifying the rules governing the implementation of cameras and 
their use. The Parliamentary Advisory Committee on Transport Safety has also published a leaflet to 
dispel the negative myths about the use and effectiveness of cameras.  

=== p.20 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 20 
 
 
Statement about speed cameras 
1998 
2003 
2004-2005 
Cameras are intended to encourage 
drivers to stick to limits, not to punish 
them 
83 
80 
76 
Fewer collisions are likely to happen on 
road where cameras are installed 
67 
 
72 
68 
Cameras are an easy way of making 
money out of motorists 
45 
 
45 
52 
Cameras mean that dangerous drivers 
are more likely to get caught 
78 
68 
61 
Use of safety cameras should be 
supported as a means of reducing 
casualties 
- 
- 
79 
The primary aim of cameras is to save 
lives 
- 
- 
68 
There are too many safety cameras in 
our local area 
- 
- 
22 
 
Table 4. Percentage of drivers answering yes to statements (Source: Lynam et al., 2005). 
7.2 
Australia and New Zealand  
Organization 
In November 2001, the Victorian Government started the arrive alive!-road safety strategy with the aim 
of having reduced road trauma by 20 percent in 2007  (http://www.arrivealive.vic.gov.au/).  Under this 
programme speed enforcement efforts were increased, with more mobile speed camera hours, new 
fixed speed camera locations and a reduction in the enforcement threshold. In Victoria, the four 
government agencies that form the “road safety partnership” are VicRoads, Victoria Police, the 
Department of Justice and the Transport Accident Commission (TAC). Each agency has specific 
responsibilities in the area of speed enforcement, but many of these responsibilities are undertaken in 
consultation or in partnership with the other road safety partners, local government and non-
governmental organisations. 
 
In New Zealand, the National Road Safety Committee (NSCR) is the principal inter-agency forum for 
communicating and agreeing top level strategy between agencies on matters related to road safety 
[41]. The Secretary for Transport, the Commissioner of the Police, the Chief Executives of Land 
Transport New Zealand, the Local Government New Zealand, the Crashes Compensation Corporation 
and Transit New Zealand all participate in this committee. The Director General of Health, the 
Secretary for Justice, and the Secretary for Labour are associate members. The Road Safety to 2010 
strategy indicates the direction for road safety in New Zealand and describes the road safety targets 
for 2010.  
 
Effects 
Evaluation of the Victorian road safety strategy by the Auditor General Victoria showed favourable 
results [2]. In the years 2002-2005 there was a reduction in fatalities of around 16%, and 
approximately 8% in serious injuries. Many factors contributed to these changes, but it is very likely 
that reduced travel speeds have been a major contributor. The most significant trauma reductions 
were obtained in metropolitan Melbourne’s low speed zones, where fatalities decreased by around 
40% and serious injuries by 15%. This reduction corresponded with a reduction in free travel speeds in 
these zones. Travel speeds in both metropolitan Melbourne and country 100 and 110 km/h speed 
zones remained relatively stable over time, and likewise the trauma reductions on these roads were 
small. Finally, there have been large decreases in fatalities and serious injuries for pedestrians, where 
urban speeds are a major determinant of severity. 
 
Overtly operated mobile speed cameras have been used in New Zealand since late 1993. Their 
operation has been confined to specific sites (called 'speed camera areas') which are mainly road 

=== p.21 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 21 
sections with a record of speed-related crashes. A trial of hidden speed cameras began in mid-1997 in 
100 km/h speed limit areas in one of New Zealand's four Police regions. Although motorists could not 
see the cameras, publicity and warning signs alerted them that they were entering a speed-camera 
zone.Keall et al. [39] found an additional reduction of mobile inconspicuous cameras of 17% for injury 
crashes (not significant) and 31% for casualties in a 2-year period (significant), as compared to a 
conspicuous camera programme only, running elsewhere in New Zealand. In that study, the 
generalized effects of the extra hidden camera programme (extending to the whole trial area 
containing (publicly) open rural roads, including roads with and without conspicuous camera 
operations) were estimated as an 11% reduction in crashes and a 19% reduction in casualties (both 
significant). 
 
Success factors 
In Australia and New Zealand, speed enforcement activities are performed by partnerships between 
national, regional and local agencies that all have an interest in road safety. According to the 
association of Australian and New Zealand road transport and traffic authorities [3] the following 
elements of speed enforcement are very important for success: 
• 
Finding a balance between crash based, intelligence driven targeted operations, and managed 
targeting to wider areas in a random nature. A complete reliance on a targeted approach to a 
small number of selected sites is not desirable since it will lead to predictability and lack of general 
deterrence. Monitoring performance and outcome measures. Recommended performance 
measures are the number of vehicles checked, total hours of enforcement, number of separate 
speed checks and number of locations checked per exposure measure (e.g. number of registered 
vehicles, population size or vehicle kilometres travelled in an area) as well as the number of hours 
of traffic enforcement conducted by specialised traffic personal or general duties police, also per 
exposure measure. Recommended outcome measures are, first, changes in crashes and driving 
speed, and second, changes in community attitudes and infringement rates. When assessing 
changes in crash rates, the contribution of other initiatives besides speed enforcement should be 
recognised, although quantification may not be possible. When looking at changes in crash rate, 
one would also need to take account of changes over time in crash reporting rates between 
jurisdictions 
• 
To support enforcement operations by public campaigns. Public education campaigns are an 
effective means of heightening the impact of enforcement and an essential part of winning support 
for speed enforcement activity. Campaigns have to be carefully thought out in terms of current 
community perceptions, the target audience, attitudes and beliefs, the previous history of the 
issue, and the available time and resources. One single message should be delivered in each 
campaign. Pretesting can help to ensure that the right message is being delivered in the right 
format.  
• 
To apply penalties that reflect community views on the seriousness of offences. Demerit points are 
an effective deterrent for speeding motorists. Loss of licence is an effective deterrent for excessive 
speeding. 
 
Procedures and guidelines in New Zealand  
The Safety Administration Programme (SAP) is the primary planning and funding programme for road 
safety activity undertaken by the New Zealand Police, Land Transport New Zealand and community 
groups [41]. In their annual programme, the SAP details specific projects, their objectives and the 
performance measures against which their result is to be assessed. The SAP is collaborative (built on 
strong partnerships nationally, regionally and locally), evidence-based (driven by analysis of 
comprehensive road safety data) and accountable (detailing desired outcomes and quantitative and 
qualitative performance measures).  
 
The SAP plans and allocates resources for strategic enforcement at the national level, and is directly 
inspired by a risk targeted road policing model. The annual SAP and the risk targeted road policing 
model are elaborated on the local situation by way of quarterly/biannual road safety action plans 
(RSAPs). In general RSAPs: 
• 
Are based on data from all key partners 
• 
Are outcome focused, have local targets 
• 
Set out responsibilities and contributions of all parties 

=== p.22 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 22 
• 
Have evidence based performance measures 
• 
Include community, local and national campaigns 
 
The RSAPs are implemented through crash books and risk targeted patrol plans. Crash books provide 
long-term risk profiles of roads and areas and risk target patrol plans allocate strategic enforcement 
hours by location and time. They are instruments to ensure that enforcement is directed toward higher 
risk locations, behaviour and times to maximize its effect. 
 
In the area of speed control the SAP outlines the following desired outcomes: 
• 
For rural roads with a speed limit of 100 km/h: a mean speed of 99 km/h and a 85th percentile 
speed of no more than 107 km/h 
• 
For urban roads with a speed limit of 50 km/h: a mean speed of 55 km/h and an 85th percentile 
speed of no more than 61 km/h. 
 
Qualitative performance measures are the extent to which speed control output is in accordance with 
the RSAPs and RTPPs, the satisfaction of local authorities and regions with police consultation 
process in the development of the RSAPs and RTPPs, the attention for targeted issues, and the 
percentage of road users who believe there is a high probability of detection of speeding. 
 
Public acceptance 
In Victoria, telephone surveys in 1999 and 2002 asked licensed drivers to report on their knowledge of 
and attitudes towards speed enforcement methods, specifically speed cameras [57].  
On the positive side, from 1999 to 2002, fewer drivers reported that they often drove 5-9 km/h over the 
speed limit, fewer drivers agreed with the statement ‘There’s not much chance of being caught 
speeding’ and more drivers reported knowledge of the facts that speed cameras operated from 
different cars and that speed cameras did not always operate from a fixed location. Better knowledge 
and better compliance with speed limits did not go hand in hand with more positive attitudes towards 
speed cameras. On the contrary, there was an increase in agreement with the statement that 
speeding fines were only for revenue raising purposes. In 2002, 71% of the sample reported that 
speeding fines were mainly for revenue raising. The researchers attribute this negative development to 
‘propagation of comments in the media supporting this idea’.  
 
In 2007, 75% of New Zealand adults agreed with the statement ‘Enforcing the speed limit helps to 
lower the road toll’ [45]. In 2007, 61% agreed or strongly agreed with the statement ‘Using speed 
cameras helps lower the road toll’. This has fluctuated around 60% in the years after 2001. 64% 
agreed that ‘the way speed cameras are being operated is fair’. Also, 63% said they supported or 
strongly supported the use of hidden cameras. Support for hidden cameras increased from 56% in 
2004, when the question was first asked.  
 
Rule 9:  
Cooperation and partnerships between police, local authorities and data experts provide the best 
guarantee for problem-oriented, outcome-focused and evidence-based speed policing operations. 
8. 
Future possibilities for speed enforcement 
8.1 
Relationships between speed enforcement and new  technologies 
The (near) future will bring new technologies that may affect speed enforcement operations, such as 
black box technologies, Intelligent Speed Assistance (ISA) or Electronic Vehicle Identification [24]. The 
questions is how these new technologies relate to the more conventional ways of speed support and 
control, such as changes to road environment and police enforcement. According to Wegman and 
Goldenbeld [67] there are three possible, non-exclusive, relationships: 
1. 
New technologies co-exist with conventional measures. While cars are increasingly being 
equipped with new technologies, police checks of speeding may continue or even intensify. 
2. 
New technologies are integrated in existing measures and make them more efficient. For 
example, enforcement may increasingly use information from EVI and as such support 
enforcement operations. 

=== p.23 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 23 
3. 
New technologies do something existing measures cannot do and will tend to replace 
conventional methods. For example, when a car is equipped with a black box that monitors 
driving speed, speed enforcement can be done at all times and places. 
 
Zaidel [72] sketches a Utopian view in which speed enforcement by the police is largely replaced by 
speed enforcement based on technology. According to Zaidel, this could be realised if: 
• 
Speed compliance is associated with the vehicle rather than a driver 
• 
In-vehicle devices and communication technology monitor vehicle speed at all times and keep a 
record of distance travelled while speeding 
• 
Vehicles owners are given redeemable credits for distance travelled at requested speed and are 
surcharged for distance travelled while speeding 
• 
Companies and fleet owners are evaluated by authorities with respect to the aggregated speeding 
performance of their vehicles; and 
• 
A marketing mechanism is created whereby non-speeding generates direct and indirect benefits to 
vehicle owners as well as to businesses.  
 
The advantages of this system of speed control, as stated by Zaidel, are that it is self-enforcing, fair, 
self sustainable, provides immediate feedback and reduces the need for conventional speed control. 
However, there may be some doubt as to whether the general public would welcome such a system. 
8.2 
Black box 
Black boxes can monitor and store various driving behaviours, including steering movements, 
accelerating and decelerating and also driving speed. Theoretically and technically it would be 
possible to compare the information of the speed limit in force and the actual driving speed and use 
this as a source of information for detecting and enforcing speed limit violations. 
 
The European SARTRE survey showed that 28% of more than 24,000 interviewed drivers were "very 
much" in favour of black box systems that would provide evidence about speeding or dangerous 
behaviour for enforcement [55]. An expert workshop organized by the ESCAPE-consortium identified 
the following preconditions for increasing the acceptance (by agencies and the public) of 'intelligent', 
vehicle-based enforcement systems such as the black box [44]: 
• 
A Europe-wide registration of car owners 
• 
Vehicle owner responsibility 
• 
Decriminalisation of most traffic offences or administrative law 
• 
Assurance to the public that the hidden purpose is not revenue making 
• 
Fully automated detection and processing of violations 
• 
Modern digital and wireless technology 
• 
Warning before intervention or recording of offence 
• 
Consideration of duration and frequency of individual’s non-compliance 
• 
Transparency of controlling strategy, use of revenues, etc 
• 
Extra benefits for vehicle owners (e.g. theft protection), drivers (e.g. navigation) and road 
operators (e.g. better traffic management) 
• 
Research to prove the effects on safety. 
8.3 
Electronic Vehicle Identification (EVI) 
Electronic Vehicle Identification (EVI) is a system that uniquely identifies a vehicle electronically. More 
specifically it can be defined as an electronic device that allows the unique, remote and reliable 
communication of identifying parameters of a vehicle [24]. It would typically comprise a secure in-
vehicle data storage element, suitable and secure interfaces and a vehicle-to-infrastructure data 
communication element. EVI can be used for many application such as crime prevention (prevention 
vehicle theft), vehicle tolling, access control (e.g. overview of cross border traffic). It can also be used 
for enforcement purpose, not only of speeding, but also of red light running and tail gaiting.  

=== p.24 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 24 
8.4 
IntelIigent Speed Assistance (ISA)  
Intelligent Speed Adaptation (ISA) is an in-vehicle system that uses information on the position of the 
vehicle in a network in relation to the speed limit in force at that particular location. ISA is meant to 
support drivers and help them to comply with the speed limits everywhere in the network. In that way 
ISA aims to prevent speeding violations (see also the ERSO text on Speeding).  
 
If large scale voluntary adoption of ISA will reduce the bulk of speed violations, this not only supports 
speed enforcement but may shift the emphasis of enforcement from general deterrence to specific 
deterrence. Instead of keeping speeds of the general driving public down - a task then taken over by 
generally accepted technology - the police can focus more on detecting extreme or repeated speed 
offenders.  
 
Rule 10:  
To the extent that new technologies facilitate voluntary speed control, police speed enforcement 
can direct itself more at detecting extreme or repeated speed offenders.  
9. 
In conclusion: Ten Rules of speed enforcement  
 
Rule 1:  
To maximize the road safety effects, traffic law enforcement should first and foremost prevent 
violations that are proven to be related with the number or severity of crashes.   
 
Rule 2:  
To achieve collective safety benefits by reducing speeds, a systematic, integrated speed management 
policy is necessary. Speed enforcement is one of the elements of an integrated speed management 
approach. 
 
Rule 3:  
Speed enforcement gains in effectiveness if it is targeted towards prioritised roads, situations and 
times. 
 
Rule 4:  
The credibility of traffic enforcement should be part of enforcement policy and is to be considered as 
an important quality aspect of enforcement. 
 
Rule 5:  
Speed camera enforcement should be used for a large concentration of traffic crashes at high-volume 
traffic locations. Physical policing can be a good alternative to safety camera enforcement when 
crashes are scattered, and provided operations are randomised and applied to a large part of the 
network. 
 
Rule 6:  
To increase its effectiveness, speed enforcement must be supported by setting safe and credible 
speed limits, by publicity, by legislation facilitating effective enforcement, and by appropriate sanctions. 
 
Rule 7:  
Alternatives to negative sanctions (such as warning letters, educational courses, speed limiters) and 
the further development of these sanctions merit serious consideration of authorities, practitioners and 
researchers. 
 
Rule 8:  
Speed enforcement operations gain in effectiveness if they have specified objectives and success 
criteria, and are monitored in terms of both process and product. 
 
Rule 9:  

=== p.25 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 25 
Cooperation and partnerships between police, local authorities and data experts provide the best 
guarantee for problem-oriented, outcome-focused and evidence-based speed policing operations. 
 
Rule 10:  
To the extent that new technologies facilitate voluntary speed control, police speed enforcement can 
direct itself more at detecting extreme or repeated speed offenders. 

=== p.26 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 26 
 
References 
1. 
Adriaensen, M., Delcourt, S., Scheers, M & Vlaminck, F. (2004)  Handboek voor het 
opstellen van de actieplannen verkeersveiligheid (Manual for the creation of traffic 
safety action plans). Belgian Road Safety Institute BIVV, Brussels. 
  
2. 
Auditor General Victoria (2006) Making travel safer: Victoria’s speed enforcement 
programme. Victoria Auditor-General’s Office, Melbourne.  
http://www.audit.vic.gov.au/reports_par/agp116_road_safety_report.pdf  
 
3. 
Austroads (2001) Speed enforcement in Australasia. Volume 1: Practice – Performance 
Measures – Outcome Measures. Volume 2: Appendices. Sydney, Austroads.  
 
4. 
Blincoe, K.M., Jones, A.P., Sauerzapf, V & Haynes, R. (2006) Speeding drivers’ 
attitudes and perceptions of speed cameras in rural England. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 38, 371–378. 
 
5. 
Campbell, M. & Stradling, S.G.(2002) The impact of speeding tickets on speeding 
behaviour. In Behavioural Research in Road Safety XII, pp 86-93. Department for 
Transport, London. 
 
6. 
Carsten, O. & Fowkes, M. (2000) External Vehicle Speed Control; executive summary 
of project results. Institute for Transport Studies, University of Leeds  
 
7. 
Carsten, O.M.J. & Tate, F.N. (2005) Intelligent speed adaptation: accident saving and 
cost-benefit analysis. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 37, 407-416. 
 
8. 
Chen, G., Wilson, J., Meckle, W. & Cooper, P. (2000) Evaluation of photo radar 
program in British Columbia. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 32, 517-526. 
 
9. 
Chen, G., Meckle, W., & Wilson, J. (2002) Speed and safety effect of photo radar 
enforcement on a highway corridor in British Columbia. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 
Volume 34, Issue 2, Pages 129-138. 
 
10. Christie, S.M., Lyons, R.A., Dunstan, F.D., & Jones, S.J. (2003) Are mobile speed 
cameras effective? A controlled before and after study. Injury Prevention, 9, 302-306.  
 
11. Controller and Auditor-General New Zealand (2002) Bringing Down the Road Toll: the 
Speed Camera Programme. http://www.oag.govt.nz/2002/speed-camera/docs/speed-
camera.pdf 
 
12. Department for Transport (2006) Handbook of Rules and Guidance for the National 
Safety Camera Programme for England and Wales for 2006/07 
http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/roadsafety/speedmanagement/nscp/handbookofrulesandguid
ancefo4582 
 
13. DETR (2001) Road safety good practice guide. Department of the Environment, 
Transport and the Regions. The Stationary Office, London. 
 

=== p.27 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 27 
14. Diamantopoulou, K. & Cameron, M. (2002) An evaluation of the effectiveness of overt 
and covert speed enforcement achieved through mobile radar operations. Report No. 
187. Monash University Accident Research Centre MUARC, Clayton, Victoria. 
 
15. Elliott, M.A., & Broughton, J. (2005) How methods and levels of plicing affect road 
casualty rates (TRL Report 637) Wokingham: Transport Research Laboratory 
 
16. Elvik, R. (1997) Effects on Accidents of Automatic Speed Enforcement in Norway, 
Transportation Research Record, 1595, 14-19. 
 
17. Elvik, R. (2001) Cost-Benefit Analysis of Police Enforcement. Report ESCAPE project. 
Working Paper. VTT, Helsinki. 
 
18. Elvik, R., Christensen, P. & Amundsen, A. (2004) Speed and road accidents; an 
evaluation of the Power Model. Report 740/2004. Institute of Transport Economics 
(TØI), Oslo.  
 
19. Elvik, R.& Vaa, T. (2004) The Handbook of Road Safety Measures. NY, Amsterdam, 
Elsevier Science.   
 
20. Elvik, R. & P. Christensen (2007) The deterrent effect of increasing fixed penalties for 
traffic offences: the Norwegian experience. Paper submitted presentation, TRB-2006 
Annual Meeting CD-ROM. 
 
21. ETSC (1995) Reducing traffic injuries resulting from excess and inappropriate speed. 
European Transport Safety Council, Brussels. 
 
22. ETSC (1999) Police enforcement strategies to reduce traffic casualties in Europe. 
ETSC, Brussels 
 
23. Evans, L. (2004) Traffic safety. Science Serving Society, Bloomfield Hills, MI, USA. 
 
24. EVI project consortium (2004) Feasibility Assessment of EVI with respect to 
requirements, User Needs and Economic Aspects.  Work Package 4. Version 
2.0.http://ec.europa.eu/transport/roadsafety_library/publications/evi_D4_V2.0.pdf 
 
25. Gains, A., Heydecker, B., Shrewsbury, J., & Robertson, S. (2004) The national safety 
camera programme. Three-year evaluation report. June 2004. PA Consulting Group, 
London. 
 
26. Goldenbeld, C. (1995) Police enforcement: theory and practice. In: PTRC, Traffic 
Management and Road Safety. Proceedings of Seminar G held at the PTRC European 
Transport Forum University of Warwick, England, 11-15 September 1995. 
 
27. Goldenbeld, Ch. (1997) Politietoezicht in verkeer: garantie voor meer veiligheid? Report 
D-97-5. Institute for Road Safety Research SWOV, Leidschendam. 
 
28. Goldenbeld, C., Jayet, M.C., Fuller, R. & Mäkinen, T. (1999) Enforcement of traffic laws. 
Review of the literature on enforcement of traffic rules in the framework of GADGET 
Work Package 5. SWOV, INRETS, TCD, VTT, Leidschendam, Netherlands. 
 

=== p.28 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 28 
29. Goldenbeld, C. & van Schagen, I. (2005) The effects of speed enforcement with mobile 
radar on speed and accidents. An evaluation study on rural roads in the Dutch province 
Friesland. Accident Analysis and prevention, 37, 1135-1144. 
 
30. Gorell, R & Sexton, B. (2004) Performance of safety cameras in London: Final Report. 
Report PPR027. TRL Limited, Wokingham.  
 
31. Haddon, W. (1980) The changing approach to the epidemiology, prevention, and 
amelioration of trauma: the transition to approaches etiologically rather than 
descriptively. American Journal of Public Health, 1968, 58:1431–1438. 
 
32. Hakkert, A. S., Gitelman, V., Cohen, A., Doveh, E., & Umansky, T. (2001) The 
evaluation of effects on driver behavior and accidents of concentrated general 
enforcement on interurban roads in Israel. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 33 (1), pp. 
43-63. 
 
33. Hauer, E., Ahlin, E.J., & Bowser, J.S. (1982) Speed enforcement and speed choice. 
Accident Analysis & Prevention, Volume 14, Issue 4, Pages 267-278. 
 
34. Hess, S. (2004) An analysis of the effects of speed limit enforcement cameras with 
differentiation by road type and catchment area. Transportation Research Record, 
1865, 28-34. 
 
35. Hess, S. & Polak, J. (2003)  Effects of speed limit enforcement cameras on accident 
rates. Transportation Research Board, 1830, 25-33. 
 
36. Hess, S. (2004)  An analysis of the effects of speed limit enforcement cameras with 
differentiation by road type and catchment area, Transportation Research Record, 
1865, 28-34. 
 
37. Jeanne Breen Consulting (2004) Review of the Rod Safety to 2010 Strategy. Final 
Report. http://www.transport.govt.nz/assets/Downloads/2010-Breen-report.pdf 
 
38. Keall, M.D., Povey, L.J.,  & Frith, W.J.(2001) The relative effectiveness of a hidden 
versus a visible speed camera programme. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 33, 277-
284.  
 
39. Keall, M.D., Povey, L.J.,  & Frith, W.J. (2002) Further results from a trial comparing a 
hidden speed camera programme with visible camera operation. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 34, 773-777.  
 
40. Kloeden, C.N., Ponte, G., & McLean, A.J. (2001) Travelling speed and the risk of crash 
involvement on rural roads. Report No CR 204. Australian Transport Safety Bureau. 
Canberra, Australia. 
 
41. Land Transport New Zealand and New Zealand Police (2005) 2005/06 Safety 
Administration Programme. Welling, New Zealand. 
http://www.ltsa.govt.nz/funding/sap/2005/docs/sap-2005-06.pdf 

=== p.29 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 29 
 
42. Lynam, D. Nilsson, G. Morsink, P. Sexton, B. Twisk, D.A.M., Goldenbeld, C. & 
Wegman, F.C.M. (2005) SUNflower +6 : further comparative study of the development 
of road safety in Sweden, United Kingdom, and the Netherlands. Leidschendam, SWOV 
Institute for Road Safety Research / Crowthorne, Berkshire, Transport Research 
Laboratory TRL / Linköping, Swedish National Road and Transport Research Institute 
VTI 
 
43. Mäkinen, T. (1990) Liikennerikkomusten subjektiivinen kiinnijäämisriski ja sen 
lisäämisen vaikutukset kuljettajien toimintaan (Subjective risk of detection for traffic 
violations and effects of subjective risk on driver behaviour) Espoo. Valtion teknillinen 
tutkimuskeskus, VTT tutkimuksia 707. 120 pp. 
 
44. Mäkinen, T., Zaidel, D.M., Andersson, G., Biecheler-Fretel, M.B., Christ. R.,  Cauzard, 
J.P., Elvik, R.,  Goldenbeld , C.,  Gelau, C., Heidstra , J., Jayet, M.-C., Nilsson, G., 
Papaioannou, P. Rothengatter, T., Quimby, A.,  Rehnova, V. and Vaa, T. (2003) Traffic 
enforcement in Europe: effects, measures, needs and future. Final report of ESCAPE. 
VTT, Espoo.  
 
45. Ministry of Transport of New Zealand (2007) Public attitudes to road safety Results of 
the 2007 survey. Ministry of Transport, New Zealand , Wellington 
http://www.transport.govt.nz/assets/NewPDFs/Attitudessurvey2007summaryweb.pdf 
 
46. Mountain, L., Hirst, W. and Maher, M. (2004) A detailed evaluation of the impact of 
speed cameras on safety. Traffic Engineering and Control, 45, 280-287.  
 
47. Newstead S.V., Cameron, M.H. & Leggett, L.M.W. (2001) The crash reduction 
effectiveness of a network-wide traffic police deployment system. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 33(3):393-406. 
 
48. OECD (1999) Safety strategies for rural roads. OECD, Paris.  
 
49. OECD/ECMT (2006) Speed management. Joint OECD/ECMT Transport Research 
Centre, Paris 
 
50. Oei, H-L. (1998) The Effect of Enforcement on Speed Behaviour: A Literature Study. 
MASTER Deliverable D3. Fourth Framework project European Commission. D98-8, 
SWOV, Leidschendam. http://virtual.vtt.fi/master/rep212.pdf 
 
51. Pilkington, P.& Kinra, S. (2005) Effectiveness of speed cameras in preventing road 
traffic collisions and related casualties: systematic review. British Medical Journal, 
BMJonline,  BMJ.com, doi:10.1136/bmj.38324.646574.AE. 
 
52. Peden, M., Scurfield, R., Sleet D., Mohan, D., Hyder, A.A., Jarawan, E., & Mathers, C. 
(2004) (Eds.) The World Report on Road traffic injury prevention. World Health 
Organization, Geneva. 
 
53. Poulter, D.R. & McKenna, F.P. (2007) Is speeding a “real” antisocial behavior? A 
comparison with other antisocial behaviors.  Accident Analysis and Prevention, 39(2), 
pp. 384-389. 
 

=== p.30 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 30 
54. RWS (2003) Evaluatie 80 km/uur- maatregel A13 Overschie: doorstroming en 
verkeersveiligheid. Rijkswaterstaat Directie Zuid-Holland, Rotterdam. 
 
55. SARTRE 3 (2004) European drivers and road risk; Part 1: report on principal results. 
INRETS, Paris 
 
56. Schagen, I.N.L.G. van, Wegman, F.C.M. & Roszbach, R. (2004) Veilige en 
geloofwaardige snelheidslimieten. (Safe and credible speed limits). Report R-2004-12. 
SWOV Institute for Road Safety Research, Leidschendam, the Netherlands. [in Dutch] 
57. Smith, G. and Senserrick, T. (2004) Public perceptions of Victorian speed enforcement 
initiatives 1999 & 2002. Report 224. Monash University, Victoria. 
http://www.monash.edu.au/muarc/reports/muarc224.pdf 
 
58. Stefan, C. (2006) Section control – automatic speed enforcement in the Kaisermühlen 
tunnel (Vienna, A22 Motorway). Austrian Road Safety Board (KvF), Vienna. 
 
59. Stradling, S.G., Martin, L. & Campbell, M. (2005) Effects of speed cameras on driver 
attitude and behaviour. In:  G. Underwood (Ed.) Traffic and Transport Psychology, pp. 
513 - 520. Elsevier. 
 
60. Swadling, D. & McInerney, R. (1999) Consistent performance and outcome measures 
for speed enforcement: The road to reduced road trauma. In: Proceedings of the 1999 
Insurance Commission of Western Australia Conference on Road Safety, 26 November 
1999, Perth, Australia. Perth: Insurance Commission of Western Australia, 1, 46-64.  
 
61. SUPREME (2007a) Thematic report. Enforcement. 
http://ec.europa.eu/transport/roadsafety_library/publications/supreme_f6_thematic_repo
rt_enforcement.pdf 
 
62. SUPREME (2007b) Best practices in road safety. Handbook for measures at the 
country level. 
http://ec.europa.eu/transport/roadsafety_library/publications/supreme_c_handbook_for_
measures_at_the_country_level.pdf 
 
63. Tingvall, C. (1997) The zero vision; A road transport system free from serious health 
losses. In: Holst, H. von, Nygren, Å., Thord, R. (Eds.), Transportation, traffic safety and 
health; The new mobility: proceedings of the first international conference, Göteborg, 
Sweden, 1995, Springer Verlag, Berlin, pp. 37-57. 
 
64. Vaa, T. (1997) Increased police enforcement: effects on speed. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 29, pp. 373-385. 
 
65. Vaa, T. & Glad, A. (1995) Påvirkning av fart: En vurdering av politiovervåking, 
automatisk trafikkontroll, sanksjoner mot regelbrudd, informasjonskampanjer. 
 
66. Wegman, F. & Aarts, L. (eds) (2006) Advancing sustainable safety. SWOV Institute for 
Road Safety Research, Leidschendam. http://www.sustainablesafety.nl/ 
 
67. Wegman, F.C.M. & C. Goldenbeld (2006) Speed management: enforcement and new 
technologies. Paper presented at the/Contribution to the Xth PRI World Congress, 27-
29 March 2006, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. 
 

=== p.31 ===
 
 
 
 
Speed Enforcement – Web text 
 
 
 
 
  
Project co-financed by the European Commission, Directorate-General Transport and Energy 
  
 
16/10/2009   Page 31 
68. Williams, A.F. (1994) The Contribution of Education and Public Information to Reducing 
Alcohol-Impaired Driving, Alcohol, Drugs and Driving, 10, p. 197-205. 
 
69. Yannis G., Louca G., Vardaki S., & Kanellaidis G. (2004) Development of traffic 
enforcement programmes for the improvement of road safety. In the Proceedings of the 
2nd International Conference on Transport Research in Greece, Hellenic Institute of 
Transportation Engineers, Hellenic Institute of Transport, Athens, February 2004, pp. 
259-268. 
 
70. Yannis G., Papadimitriou Ε., & Antoniou, C. (2007) Multilevel modeling for the regional 
effect of enforcement on road accidents. Article in press, Αccident Analysis and 
Prevention. 
 
71. Zaal, D. (1994) Traffic Law Enforcement: A review of the literature. Report no. 53. 
Monash University, Accident Research Centre, Clayton, Victoria. 
 
72. Zaidel, D. (2000) 'Total Speeding Management (TSM) - a different way for Controlling 
Speeding', paper presented at the 13th ICTCT-workshop, 5-7 October 2000, ICTCT, 
Corfu, Greece  
