
=== p.1 ===
 
 
 
Department for Transport Requirements about the Publication of 
Information Related to Speed Cameras 
 
 
 
The Department has accepted the advice of the report (dated 5th April 2011) 
of a working group about the publication of information related to speed 
cameras except in a few respects related to offence data (specifically parts of 
paragraphs 4.3, 4.5, 4.6 and 6.2).     
 
In relation to offence data the Department considers there is a strong 
justification in terms of public transparency and accountability to publish this 
information site by site for fixed camera sites.   There has been further 
dialogue with the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO), whose roads 
policing lead has confirmed support for moving to a position where site 
specific data is released with a review after six months. 
 
Therefore the Department requires English highway authorities1 to either 
publish or ensure publication of site by site casualty, collision and speed 
information for permanent fixed camera sites.   The information should usually 
include annual collision and casualty data back to 1990 for the numbers of 
killed and seriously injured people and for all personal injuries.   The 
Department is making a standard template available for local authorities to 
use if they wish.   Section 3 of the working group’s report contains further 
details. 
 
The Department will set up a central hub providing links to local websites 
where this information would be housed.    Local authorities should publish 
information up to 2010 as soon as practical and inform the Department (at 
road.safety@dft.gsi.gov.uk ) by 20th July of the web address for their 
information. 
 
Local authorities which support camera enforcement financially should also 
ensure that a deployment strategy is published.   Section 5 of the working 
group’s report contains further details. 
 
Annual totals of the numbers of cases taken forward to prosecution or 
education are to be published by police forces (or other organisations on their 
behalf) site by site for permanent and long term (more than six months) 
temporary fixed speed camera sites.     
 
 
                                                 
1 Transport for London in respect of London.   The Highways Agency will publish site by site 
casualty, collision and speed information for permanent fixed camera sites on its network or 
provide links to where such sites are being included in what local authorities are publishing. 
 

=== p.2 ===
Total numbers prosecutions arising or offences pursued from camera 
enforcement (whether fixed or mobile) in a year and the disposal method (for 
example via training, fixed penalty notices or court summons) are to be 
published by police force area.  Dependent on local practices and feasibility, 
information may also be published in some places at the local highway 
authority scale.     
 
The Department is liaising further with the Association of Chief Police Officers 
(ACPO) about the prompt local publication of 2010 information related to 
prosecution numbers at both the site by site level for fixed cameras and the 
totals for police force/ local highway authority areas.  Paragraphs 4.1, 4.2, 4.4 
and 4.7 to 4.14 of the working group’s report include more details. 
 
The Department will review the position related to implementation of the 
publication of speed camera information after six months with ACPO and the 
working group.  
