
=== p.1 ===
DEPARTMENT FOR TRANSPORT  
DfT Circular 01/2007 
Department for Transport 
Great Minster House, 76 Marsham Street, London SW1P 4DR 
31 January 2007 
USE OF SPEED AND RED­LIGHT CAMERAS FOR 
TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT
: GUIDANCE ON 
DEPLOYMENT
, VISIBILITY AND SIGNING 
INTRODUCTION 
1.  The Department
’s joint statement with the Association of Chief Police Officers 
(ACPO) and the Home Office (DfT
, ACPO and HO, 2005) recognises speeding as one 
of the four most significant dimensions of unlawful, disorderly and dangerous road 
vehicle use. It therefore provides a joint commitment to tackle this activity
. 
2.  Safety cameras provide a valuable and cost­effective method of preventing, detecting 
and enforcing speed and traffic light offences. They encourage changed driver 
behaviour and are also proven to make a significant contribution to improving road 
safety for all road users. Safety cameras therefore play an important role in an integrated 
road safety strategy
. 
3.  On 15 December 2005 the Secretary of State for Transport announced (Hansard, 2005, 
Column 178WS) the ending of the National Safety Camera Programme and netting­off 
funding arrangement for cameras in England and Wales. Camera funding, activities and 
partnerships are being integrated into the wider road safety delivery process from 1 April 
2007. 
4.  The move gives local authorities, the police and other local partners greater freedom 
and flexibility to pursue whichever locally agreed mix of road safety measures they see 
fit in order to reduce road casualties in their area. W
ith this also comes greater local 
accountability for the future deployment and operation of cameras. 
5.  The fundamental objective underlying the National Safety Camera Programme has 
been to reduce speeding, collisions and casualties at locations where excessive speed 
represents a road safety problem, and to achieve this result through camera locations 
being publicised, signed and visible to road users. Whilst recognising greater local 
1 

=== p.2 ===
flexibility
, it is the Department
’s intention that road safety partnerships continue to 
follow this approach in respect of safety camera enforcement at specific sites as part of 
their local road safety strategies. 
6.  This Circular provides guidance and best practice advice on the deployment of speed 
and red­light cameras in these circumstances after 1 April 2007. The guidance does not 
restrict or fetter the police’s discretion to enforce covertly anywhere, at any time. 
7.  This Circular supersedes Circular Roads 01/92 (Use of Technology for Traffic 
Enforcement: Guidance on Deployment), Circular Roads 01/95 (Traffic Signal and 
Speed Camera Signing) and the Handbook of Rules and Guidance for the National 
Safety Camera Programme for England and Wales 2006/07, which are now cancelled. 
BACKGROUND 
8.  Safety cameras are those that enforce speeding and/or traffic­light offences. A number 
of independent research studies, including of the National Safety Camera Programme, 
have shown that cameras are an extremely effective mechanism for reducing vehicle 
speeds and road casualties at camera sites. These include: 
•  Cost–benefit analysis of traffic light and speed cameras (August 1996) 
•  A cost recovery system for speed and red­light cameras – two­year pilot 
evaluation (February 2003) 
•  The National Safety Camera Programme – three­year evaluation report (June 
2004) 
•  The National Safety Camera Programme – four­year evaluation report 
(December 2005) 
9.  These reports can be found on the Department for Transport web site at 
www
.dft.gov
.uk/safetycameras. 
10.  The independent four­year evaluation report of the National Safety Camera 
Programme, covering over 4100 camera sites operating in some 38 safety camera 
partnership areas, was published on 15 December 2005. It recorded a 42 per cent 
reduction in death and serious injury and a 22 per cent reduction in personal injury 
collisions at camera sites. 
11.  The four­year evaluation also considered the effect of ‘regression­to­mean
’ – the effect 
arising because the number of collisions in the period before the installation of a camera 
may be higher than the long­term average for that location. It concluded that, even 
after allowing for this phenomenon, safety cameras still achieve substantial and valuable 
reductions in collisions and casualties. 
12.  In August 2006, the Department published new guidance (DfT
, 2006b) to traffic 
authorities on setting local speed limits. Traffic authorities have been asked to review 
and implement any necessary changes to the speed limits on all their A and B roads by 
2011 in accordance with the new guidance. They
, and other local delivery partners, will 
also wish to monitor and reassess enforcement needs alongside these reviews. 
2 

=== p.3 ===
THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK  
13.  The Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 and The Road Traffic Act 1988 require speed 
enforcement devices to be type­approved by the Home Secretary before evidence from 
them can be used in court proceedings. 
14.  The Home Office type approval process provides a public assurance of any equipment
’s 
accuracy and reliability
. Type approval is granted only to devices that have a high degree 
of accuracy and reliability to satisfy rigorous testing by the Home Office Scientific 
Development Branch (HOSDB) and the police in the field. Testing ensures that all 
devices are robust, reliable and can produce accurate readings or images under a variety 
of extreme conditions. Type approval is granted to a particular kind of device, with each 
individual device required to be manufactured to the same high standard. 
15.  Documentation setting out the rigorous standards with which type­approved 
equipment is required to comply
, in both design and operation, can be found on the 
Home Office Scientific Development Branch area of the Home Office web site at 
http://scienceandresearch.homeoffice.gov
.uk/hosdb/. 
16.  The Road Traffic Act 1991 makes various provisions relating to the use of automatic 
devices for the detection of speeding and traffic­light offences. This includes, by virtue 
of section 95A of the Highways Act 1980 (as inserted by section 40 of the Road Traffic 
Act 1991), providing highways authorities with the power to install and maintain, on or 
near a highway
, structures and equipment for the detection of traffic offences. 
17.  The installation of traffic and speed cameras is not development as defined in the Town 
and Country Planning Act 1990, so neither planning permission nor permitted 
development rights are required for their installation. 
18.  Part VI of The Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 requires that, unless a road has been 
designated special road status (i.e. a motorway), speed limits are implemented either by 
virtue of the provision of a system of street lights (restricted road status) or through 
Traffic Regulation Order
. Traffic authorities are required to ensure that all speed limit 
signing complies with the statutory requirements prescribed in The Traffic Signs 
Regulations and General Directions 2002 (TSRGD) as amended, or have been specially 
authorised by the Department or the Government Office for the regions. 
IDENTIFYING THE APPROPRIATE SOLUTION (AT SPECIFIC LOCATIONS) 
19.  As part of the 15 December 2005 announcement, the Department is encouraging the 
establishment of wider road safety partnerships to facilitate better ‘meshing’ between 
safety cameras and wider operations of traffic management, road safety
, policing, and 
other local functions. 
20.  W
ithin this wider road safety approach, local authorities, the police and the other local 
partners are encouraged to work closely together to identify the top priorities for 
improving road safety in the area of the partnership, including enforcement activity
, and 
to agree a joint strategy and their respective roles within that strategy
. 
3 

=== p.4 ===
21.  Safety cameras are one of a wide range of measures that are effective at reducing vehicle 
speeds and casualties when used correctly and in the appropriate circumstances. The 
local partners should therefore work together to decide the most suitable approach to 
safety problems at specific locations depending upon the evidence and local needs and 
considerations. This should include investigation of the nature of the problem, 
including current vehicle speeds, the proportion of vehicles exceeding the speed limit in 
free­flowing conditions, the proportion of different collision types and the causes of 
those collisions. It is recommended that, before a decision is made to use camera 
enforcement, traffic authorities confirm that the speed limit at each proposed site is 
appropriate. 
22.  For selecting potential camera sites, it is recommended that analysis of collision data 
should be undertaken over a minimum period (e.g. most recent 3 years, or preferably 5 
years) to determine whether a camera is an appropriate solution to reduce speeds and/or 
collisions at that site. Average (mean) and 85th percentile speeds should also be 
collected so that the data is not more than 12 months old. This will help to demonstrate 
the level of non compliance with the speed limit, which itself should also have been 
constant over the same minimum period. 
23.  The local partnership is fully accountable for these decisions and should be proactive in 
communicating information on the deployment of cameras through the usual channels, 
including the Local Transport Plan process and local Speed Management Strategies. 
24.  Vehicle Activated Signs (VAS) that are TSRGD compliant have been shown to be 
effective at reducing speeds and collisions when used instead of or in conjunction with 
safety cameras and may be considered as part of an overall casualty reduction strategy
. 
Reference should be made to TAL 01/03 Vehicle Activated Signs (DoT
, 2003) and TRL 
Report 548 (W
innett and Wheeler
, 2003) when considering the use of VAS. 
25.  Speed Indicator Devices (SID) are not prescribed as traffic signs in TSRGD, but the 
Department recognises that these are widely used to help raise awareness of speeding, 
particularly at community concern sites. SID should not be used as an alternative to 
prescribed speed­limit signing. Care should also be taken to ensure that the use of SID 
does not mislead or confuse road users as to the posted speed limit on a road, or affect 
the legality of any enforcement undertaken. 
DEPLOYMENT 
26.  The primary objective for camera deployment is to reduce deaths and injuries on roads 
by reducing the level and severity of speeding and red­light running. The aim is to do 
this by preventing, detecting and enforcing speed and red­light offences, which includes 
encouraging changed driver behaviour by the use of safety camera activity
. 
27.  All camera activities have the potential to deal with large numbers of alleged offenders. 
It is therefore essential that, from the earliest stages when the use of cameras is being 
considered, discussions take place with all agencies at a local level and an agreement is 
reached on detailed plans for implementation. The police are responsible for operating 
and maintaining the cameras and for initiating follow­up procedures to deal with 
offences detected, while Her Majesty’s Court Service (HMCS) is responsible for 
collecting fines or fixed penalties and endorsing licences. Their full co­operation and 
agreement for new or continued camera use is therefore essential and should be secured 
at an early stage. 
4 

=== p.5 ===
28.  In view of local decision making and accountability
, the Department does not want to 
be prescriptive about the conditions to be met for the use of safety cameras. However
, 
evidence from the evaluation reports for the National Safety Camera Programme for 
England and Wales (2000–04) has continuously shown that the use of cameras has been 
effective when deployment was based upon locations where a specific level of Killed or 
Seriously Injured (KSI) collisions and excessive speed had occurred. 
29.  Included at Annex A are the site selection criteria that applied at the end of the 
National Safety Camera Programme. Traffic authorities and road safety partnerships 
may wish to consider using these, as they have developed with the extended roll­out of 
the National Safety Camera Programme. These previous site selection criteria have 
been shown to reduce speeds and casualties at camera sites and are now generally 
recognised, as they have been made publicly available. It is recommended that locally 
agreed deployment criteria are developed under which traffic authorities and road safety 
partnerships have a systematic approach to site selection that can be demonstrated 
locally
. 
30.  Whilst the primary objective for camera deployment is to reduce KSIs at known 
collision locations, cameras can also be beneficial where there is community concern – 
i.e. the local community requests enforcement at a particular site because traffic speed 
is causing concern for road safety
, or where there are engineering factors that cannot be 
implemented in the short term and enforcement is being used as an interim measure. 
31.  The Department believes that ensuring compliance with temporary speed limits at road 
works is extremely important to protect both the travelling public and the workforce 
undertaking the road works. The use of temporary cameras, to enforce temporary lower 
speed limits, should be seriously considered at all major road works to reduce the 
likelihood of collisions occurring and to ensure road­worker safety
. The Highways 
Agency has produced guidance for camera use at roadworks on trunk roads and this is 
commended to all traffic authorities. 
http://www
.highways.gov
.uk/aboutus/documents/crs_temp_speed_nettingoff.pdf 
32.  As mentioned in paragraph 13 above, all enforcement devices must be type­approved, 
and there are many devices that have received type approval. The appropriate device(s) 
will depend on local agreement. There are four main types of equipment, and 
circumstances in which these may be appropriate are indicated below: 
•  Fixed speed camera sites – used at sites where collisions are clustered around a 
particular point or location. 
•  Mobile speed camera sites – used at sites where collisions are scattered along a 
length of road or where enforcement is needed at specific times of the day or year
. 
This type of enforcement can also be used to complement fixed enforcement. 
•  Average speed camera sites (fixed) – this type of enforcement has the effect of 
calming the speed over a longer distance and can be used at sites where a 
significant number of collisions are scattered along a length of road and for major 
road works enforcement. 
•  Red­light camera sites – used at traffic­light junctions where collisions are 
recorded because of vehicles failing to comply with a red traffic light. 
5 

=== p.6 ===
33. All of the four camera types above may be used as part of wider route treatments.  
34.  Road safety partnerships will have the flexibility to use type­approved equipment to 
enforce 20 mph speed limits from 1 April 2007. However
, the Department remains of 
the view that 20 mph zones should continue to be self­enforcing, where appropriate 
through suitable traffic calming measures. 
PRE­ENFORCEMENT CHECKS 
Non­compliance with the Traffic Regulation Order requirements or speed limit signing 
requirements may mean that the speed limit is unenforceable. 
35.  Whatever locally agreed deployment strategy is adopted, there are a number of pre­
enforcement checks that are recommended before camera enforcement commences: 
•  Ensure that the speed limit is appropriate – the Department published guidance 
on setting local speed limits in August 2006 (see paragraph 12). 
•  Ensure that the Traffic Regulation Order (where applicable) is legal and correct 
– unless a road has been designated special road status (i.e. a motorway), speed 
limits are implemented either by virtue of the provision of a system of street lights 
(restricted road status) or through Traffic Regulation Order
. If a Traffic 
Regulation Order is required, this should be reviewed to ensure that it is still 
appropriate and lawful. 
•  Ensure signing is lawful and correct – traffic authorities are required to ensure 
that speed limit and camera signing complies with the statutory requirements 
prescribed in TSRGD, or as specially authorised. 
36.  These checks should be undertaken each time prior to a period of enforcement taking 
place and, for those areas where enforcement is not regularly undertaken, checks should 
be undertaken on a regular (at least six­monthly) basis. In all cases, camera and speed 
limit signs must not be obscured: they must be positioned so that they are clearly visible 
at all times. 
37.  When it has been confirmed that a site is suitable for camera enforcement, the 
enforcement is undertaken in accordance with the ACPO Code of Practice for 
Operational Use of Road Policing Enforcement Technology (ACPO, 2004). 
SIGNING, VISIBILITY AND CONSPICUITY 
38.  The following signing guidance is aimed at safety cameras, whereas the visibility and 
conspicuity guidance is aimed at speed cameras rather than red­light cameras, as in all 
cases a red traffic signal will clearly indicate that a driver is required to stop. 
39.  As part of the National Safety Camera Programme, signing, visibility and conspicuity 
rules were mandatory to enable costs to be netted off from fine income, and this has 
helped to highlight to motorists where enforcement is being undertaken and, combined 
with the communications activities undertaken as part of the programme, why 
enforcement is being undertaken. The Department
’s intention is that this high­visibility 
approach should be retained. In view of the importance of consistency on this 
6 

=== p.7 ===
fundamental point and to avoid confusion, the Department expects that enforcement 
by any road safety partnership, or representative of a road safety partnership, should 
follow the guidelines that are in this section. 
Signing 
40.  A speed limit is made lawful by the presence of street lights and/or a Traffic Regulation 
Order and the provision of prescribed speed limit signs appropriately located that 
comply with the TSRGD. 
41.  The Department has published an aide­memoire (DfT
, 2006a) that provides guidance 
on speed limit and safety camera signing and is designed to ensure correct and 
consistent signing across the country
. It does not replace or update the legal 
requirements of TSRGD but should be considered as best practice. In summary: 
•  Camera signs should continue to be co­located with speed limit signs where 
permitted and practicable. 
•  For fixed speed enforcement, co­located camera and speed limit reminder signs 
should continue to be placed to allow the signs and speed camera to be visible to 
the driver in the same view
. A camera sign may also be placed not more than 1 
km from the first camera housing in the direction being enforced (including or 
excluding side roads at the discretion of the road safety partnership). 
•  For mobile enforcement, co­located camera and speed limit reminder signs 
should continue to be placed in advance of the point of entry to the site or route 
(including or excluding side roads at the discretion of the road safety partnership) 
in the direction being enforced. Camera signs should also continue to be placed 
thereafter at intervals of around 1 km throughout the length being enforced. 
42.  Reference should be made to TAL 01/95 Speed limit signs – a guide to good practice 
(DoT
, 1995) when reviewing speed limit signing. On dual carriageway roads and 
motorways, wherever possible an additional camera warning sign should be placed on 
the central reserve. 
43.  In all cases, camera and speed limit signs must not be obscured but be positioned to be 
clearly visible at all times. 
44.  On every occasion before commencing enforcement at a camera site, the enforcement 
officer should be satisfied that the relevant speed limit and safety camera signing is 
present and correct. 
Visibility 
45.  Depending upon the enforcement method used, speed camera housings (including 
tripod­mounted cameras) or the camera operator or the mobile enforcement vehicle 
should be clearly visible from the driver’s viewpoint at the following minimum visibility 
distances: 
•  60 metres where the speed limit is 40 mph or less; 
•  100 metres at all other speed limits. 
7 

=== p.8 ===
46.  On every occasion before commencing enforcement at a camera site, the enforcement 
officer should check that the visibility guidance is met. 
Conspicuity 
47.  Fixed speed camera housings located within an area of street or highway lighting should 
be coloured yellow either by painting both the front and back of the housing or covering 
both the front and back of the housing with retro­reflective sheeting. In an area not 
covered by street or highway lighting, the speed camera housing should be treated with 
yellow retro­reflective sheeting. The recommended paint colour is No.363 Bold Yellow 
of BS381C:1996. The retro­reflective sheeting should meet the requirements of BS EN 
12899­1:2001 or a suitable microprismatic sheeting conforming to BS 8408 or an 
equivalent Standard of a European Economic Area State. 
48.  Vehicles from which enforcement may take place should be liveried and clearly 
identifiable as an enforcement vehicle. V
isibility of the livery should be maintained 
during enforcement, e.g. where it is necessary for the doors to be open, markings or 
livery should be apparent to approaching traffic in the direction of enforcement. If the 
enforcement officer is undertaking enforcement away from the vehicle, the 
enforcement officer should be conspicuous by wearing high­visibility clothing. 
49.  On every occasion before commencing enforcement at a camera site, the enforcement 
officer should check that the conspicuity guidance is met. 
This camera signing, visibility and conspicuity guidance has no bearing on the 
enforcement of offences. Non­compliance with this guidance does not provide any 
mitigation of, or defence for, an alleged offence committed under current UK law
. 
COMMUNICATIONS AND PUBLICITY 
50.  The Department recommends that partnerships continue to proactively provide 
information about safety cameras, including their deployment, and the benefits they 
bring, but do so as part of a wider approach to road safety­related communications. 
51.  That wider approach should aim to raise public awareness of the behaviours that can 
cause casualties on the roads, the partnership
’s approach to dealing with these 
behaviours, and the steps the public can take to ensure they and others drive safely
. 
52.  When partnerships are communicating information on safety cameras, we recommend 
the following be considered a priority: 
•  the location of camera sites; 
•  the criteria for the location of camera sites; 
•  types of cameras, how they work, and why they are deployed; 
•  the justification for the use of camera sites; 
•  local casualty reduction figures; 
8 

=== p.9 ===
• 
the effect that cameras have had on casualty figures in the local area;  
•  that cameras are now funded in the same way as other road safety measures; 
•  contact details for the partnership. 
53.  Every effort should be made to publicise the use of cameras in an area. The opportunity 
should be taken to emphasise the road safety objectives of camera enforcement, as well 
as to enhance the deterrent effect through this publicity to improve compliance. 
54.  Local publicity campaigns should complement the Department
’s THINK! road safety 
campaign. More information on this can be found at: www
.thinkroadsafety
.gov
.uk. 
MONITORING EFFECTIVENESS 
55.  As with all other road safety or casualty reduction interventions, data should be 
collected to monitor effectiveness of safety camera use. It is recommended that, as a 
minimum, speed data and collision data are routinely collected at camera sites. 
Additionally
, other data such as public opinion and the contribution that cameras make 
to the overall casualty reduction picture should be continued. 
56.  Road safety partnerships are encouraged to, at least annually
, review all their existing 
camera sites and other collision hotspots (i.e. roads where there appear to be a 
comparatively high number of collisions) within their area. This review should ensure 
that all sites have been identified where casualties could be reduced by the use of safety 
cameras or other road safety interventions. It should also help to inform the 
enforcement strategy to ensure that camera resources continue to be deployed to best 
effect in reducing collisions and casualties. 
57.  This should be an ongoing process to identify those sites where camera enforcement is 
judged to be a continuing or appropriate solution and should take into account views 
put forward by both local communities and road users. 
58.  In particular
, the review should identify sites where a good safety record has been 
achieved and therefore make an assessment on whether safety camera enforcement 
needs to be retained to maintain effective compliance. Or the review may identify sites 
where there appears to be a continuing problem of high numbers of collisions 
notwithstanding the use of cameras, and this will enable the assessment of whether 
further complementary or different action should be taken. 
59.  Any monitoring undertaken should consider the effect of ‘regression­to­mean
’. This 
may be particularly relevant if a camera site is selected when the collision record is at 
its worst, i.e. the number of collisions in the period before the installation of a camera 
may be higher than the long­term average for that location. 
60.  Whilst the Department will not be collecting or requiring camera data to be submitted 
(as existed under the National Safety Camera Programme), it will wish to monitor the 
effectiveness of the freedom and flexibilities being made available from 1 April 2007. 
Road safety partnerships are therefore encouraged to continue to collect and publicise 
data showing effectiveness of safety cameras within their road safety strategies. 
9 

=== p.10 ===
REFERENCES  
ACPO (2004), ACPO Code of Practice for Operational Use of Road Policing Enforcement 
T
echnology. London: ACPO 
www
.acpo.police.uk/asp/policies/Data/RPET%20Manual%20version%202­3.pdf 
Department for Transport (2003), Traffic Advisory Leaflet 01/03, Vehicle Activated Signs, 
London: DfT 
www
.dft.gov
.uk/stellent/groups/dft_roads/documents/page/dft_roads_508245.pdf 
Department for Transport (2006a), Aide Memoire on Speed Limit and Safety Camera 
Signing. London: DfT 
www
.dft.gov
.uk/stellent/groups/dft_rdsafety/documents/page/dft_rdsafety_612072.hcsp 
Department for Transport (2006b), Circular 01/2006, Setting Local Speed Limits. 
London: TSO 
www
.dft.gov
.uk/stellent/groups/dft_rdsafety/documents/page/dft_rdsafety_612262.pdf 
Department for Transport, Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) and the Home 
Office (2005), Roads Policing Strategy, 
www
.dft.gov
.uk/stellent/groups/dft_rdsafety/documents/page/dft_rdsafety_033749.pdf 
Department of Transport (1995), Traffic Advisory Leaflet 01/95, Speed limit signs – a 
guide to good practice, London: DoT 
www
.dft.gov
.uk/stellent/groups/dft_roads/documents/page/dft_roads_504746.hcsp 
Hansard (2005), Written statement by Secretary of State for Transport on changes to 
the National Safety Camera Programme, 15 December 2005, House of Commons, 
Official Report, Column 178WS 
www
.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200506/cmhansrd/cm051215/wmstext/51215m0 
5.html_sbhd2 
W
innett, M. A. and Wheeler
, A. H. (2003) TRL Report 548, Vehicle­activated signs – 
a large scale evaluation. Crowthorne: TRL 
http://217.118.128.203/store/report_detail.asp?srid=2699&pid=211 
CONTACT FOR FURTHER INFORMATION 
Speed Management Branch  
Department for Transport  
Zone 2/13, Great Minster House  
76 Marsham Street  
London SW1P 4DR  
Tel: 020 7944 2466 / 8818  
Fax: 020 7944 9618  
E­mail: road.safety@dft.gsi.gov
.uk  
Web: www
.dft.gov
.uk  
10 

=== p.11 ===
ANNEX 
Site selection criteria that applied at the end of the National Safety Camera Programme 
Rule 
Fixed speed camera 
sites 
Mobile speed camera 
sites 
Routes 
Red­light or combined 
red­light speed 
1 
Site or route length 
requirements 
Between 0.4 km and 
1.5 km 
Between 0.4 km and 
5km 
Between 5 km and 20 
km 
From stop line to stop 
line in direction of 
travel 
2 
Number of KSI 
(killed or seriously 
injured) collisions 
At least 3 KSI 
collisions per km in 
the baseline period.* 
At least 1 KSI collision 
per km (average) in 
the baseline period.* 
A minimum of 3 
existing core sites 
within the length. 
(There are no further 
requirements.) 
OR 
Has at least 1 KSI 
collision per km 
(average) in the 
baseline period* and 
meets the PIC total 
value below. 
At least 1 KSI collision 
within the junction in 
the baseline period.* 
Selection must be 
based upon a collision 
history of red­light 
running. 
*The baseline period is the most recent 36­month period available when proposal is submitted, 
where the end date is within 12 months of the date of submission. 
3 
Total value required Built­up 
22/km 
Non­built­
up 
18/km 
Built­up 
11/km 
Non­built­
up 
9/km 
Built up 
8/km 
Non built 
up 
6/km 
10 
For sites up to 1 km, the above value is required. 
For sites longer that 1 km, the value is per km. 
4 
85th percentile 
speed at proposed 
sites 
Speed survey shows free­flow 85th percentile speed is at or above 
ACPO enforcement threshold in built­up areas and 5 mph over 
maximum speed limit in non­built­up areas. This can apply to all 
vehicles or a vehicle class but must be compared consistently. 
Not applicable 
5 
Site conditions that 
are suitable for the 
type of enforcement 
proposed 
Loading and unloading 
of camera can take 
place safely. 
Location for mobile 
enforcement is easily 
accessible and there 
is space for 
enforcement to take 
place in a visible, legal 
and safe manner. 
The location of 
collisions in the 
baseline period will 
determine the length 
of route. 
Loading and 
unloading the camera 
can take place safely. 
6 
Suitability of site for 
camera 
enforcement 
The highway authority must undertake a site survey, demonstrating the following: 
(a) the speed limit has been reviewed, confirming that camera enforcement is the right solution; 
(b) there is no other cost­effective engineering solution that is more appropriate; 
(c) that the Traffic Regulation Order (where applicable) and signing are lawful and correct. 
New camera sites will be selected using an assessment that includes the level of fatal, serious and slight collisions. The 
combined level of collisions will be expressed as a numerical scale (see below) and assessed relative to the road 
classification for the site – whether it is either a ‘built­up’ or ‘non­built­up’ area and according to the type of site, i.e. route, 
fixed, mobile or red­light. 
Fatal or serious injury collision = 5 (i.e. 2 serious collisions = 10) 
Slight injury collision = 1 (i.e. 5 slight collisions = 5) 
‘Built­up area’ is defined as a road with a speed limit of 40 mph or less. 
‘Non­built­up area’ is defined as a road with a speed limit of 50 mph or more. 
11 

=== p.12 ===
Published by 
TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from: 
Online 
www.tsoshop.co.uk 
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E­mail 
TSO 
PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GN 
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522 
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533 
E­mail: customer
.services@tso
.co
.uk 
Textphone 0870 240 3701 
TSO Shops 
123 Kingsway
, London,WC2B 6PQ 
020 7242 6393 Fax 020 7242 6394 
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD 
028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401 
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh EH3 9AZ 
0870 606 5566 Fax 0870 606 5588 
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents 
© Crown copyright 2007 
Copyright in the typographical arrangement and design rests with the Crown. 
Published for the Department for T
ransport under licence from the Controller of HMSO. 
This publication, excluding logos, may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium for  
non­commercial research, private study or for internal circulation within an organisation. This is  
subject to it being reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading context. The copyright source  
of the material must be acknowledged and the title of the publication specified.  
For any other use of this material please apply for a Click­Use Licence at  
www
.opsi.gov
.uk/click­use/index.htm, or by writing to the Licensing Division,  
Office of Public Sector Information, St Clements House, 2–16 Colegate, Norwich NR3 1BQ,  
fax 01603 723000, or e­mail licensing@cabinet­office.x.gsi.gov
.uk.  
Printed by The Stationery Office Ltd under the authority and superintendence of the  
Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office and Queen
’s Printer of Acts of Parliament.  
Printed in Great Britain on paper containing at least 75% recycled fibre.  
ISBN­13 978­0­11­552834­7 
£6.00 
www.tso.co.uk
I S B N 978-0-11-552834-7
9 780115 528347
 
