FUNDED BY
Guide for
Determining Readiness for Speed Cameras
and other Automated Enforcement

© 2020 GRSF (The World Bank) and GRSP (Global Road Safety Partnership)
Some rights reserved.

Standard Disclaimer
This work is a product of the staff of GRSF (The World Bank) and GRSP. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of
the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank
and GRSP do not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgment on the part of GRSP or The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory
or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because GRSF (World Bank) and GRSP
encourage dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part,
for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.

Acknowledgements
This guidance document was co-written by Soames Job (Head of the Global Road Safety Facility-
GRSF, & Global Road Safety Lead, World Bank) and Dave Cliff, Judy Fleiter, Marcin Flieger and
Brett Harman (Global Road Safety Partnership - GRSP).
The document was peer-reviewed by Blair Turner and Sven-Olof Hassel (external reviewers),
Sudeshna Mitra and Juan Velasquez (GRSF). Valuable inputs were also provided by Aurelio
Menendez, Chris Bennett, the GRSF Team (World Bank), Robert Susanj and Malcolm Lilley from
GRSP.
GRSF was supported in the project by funding from UK Aid and Bloomberg Philanthropies.
GRSP was supported by funding from Bloomberg Philanthropies.




Recommended citation:
Job, S., Cliff, D, Fleiter, J.J., Flieger, M., & Harman, B. (2020). Guide for Determining Readiness for
Speed Cameras and Other Automated Enforcement. Global Road Safety Facility and the Global
Road Safety Partnership, Geneva, Switzerland.




2    Guide for Determining Readiness for Speed
     Cameras and other Automated Enforcement
Glossary
Automated Enforcement: general term for all forms of technology which allow for a violation
of a road rule or law to be detected and recorded without direct human involvement.

Fixed Speed Camera: A device mounted permanently beside or over a roadway to check
speeds of passing vehicles which photographs vehicles exceeding the speed limit by the
prescribed level. The speed camera photographs the speeding vehicle with sufficient clarity
to clearly show the speeding vehicle’s registration or license plate. It must also record the
time, date, location, prescribed maximum speed limit, direction of travel and detected vehicle
speed.

Mobile or Vehicle Mounted Speed Camera: A speed camera as described above that is
installed in a motor vehicle or mounted on the roadside and can be moved from site to site.

Point to Point Speed Control: Automatic section speed control (also known as Average Speed
Control or Section Control, with two or more linked speed cameras to measure the average
speed between the cameras, based on the elapsed time to travel a known distance. Average
speed may also be detected through vehicle tags at entry and exit points to toll roads (e.g., toll
collection system – note that toll collection devices must be also be appropriately calibrated).

Red Light Camera: A device mounted permanently beside or over a roadway to detect vehicles
failing to stop for red traffic signals.

Dual Red Light/Speed Cameras: A device mounted permanently beside or over a roadway
to detect vehicles failing to stop for red traffic signals and/or exceeding a speed limit in the
manner described above.

Enforcement Threshold Tolerance: The margin above the prescribed speed limit within
which motorists will not be cited for a speeding violation. A tolerance level is used to account
for factors such as inconsistent vehicle speedometers and the calibration of speed detection
equipment.

General Deterrence: This principle relies on the perception that detection and apprehension
are possible at any time, which therefore deters offending.

Specific Deterrence: This principle relates to offenders who have already been apprehended
and have experienced punishment for an offence, which then acts as a deterrent to reoffending.

Automatic Number Plate Recognition (ANPR): This technology automatically identifies
vehicles by reading an image of a vehicle registration plate via optical character recognition.

Registration plates: Also known as License plates or Number plates – these plates are issued
by a licensing authority and are fitted to a vehicle to provide a unique identifier for each vehicle.




3    Guide for Determining Readiness for Speed
     Cameras and other Automated Enforcement
1       Introduction
        and Purpose

This guide has been prepared to assist a jurisdiction to
determine the level of readiness to move to automated
enforcement (AE). Speed cameras enforcing speed limits
are a common application of AE and there are many
systemic legal and operational elements that must be
in place before AE can be effective. For example, an
accurate image of a speeding vehicle, in the absence of
robust driver licensing and vehicle registration systems,
is of little road safety value. Importantly, automated
speed enforcement should be considered as one part
of a comprehensive speed management approach
that includes road infrastructure and roadside policing
as well. The management of speed is a fundamental
element of the Safe System1.
Aims of this document:
1. To briefly identify the powerful practical value of AE
    in saving lives and reducing injuries.
2. To identify issues and criteria to be considered
    before commencing automated enforcement.
3. To identify steps to be taken to achieve readiness
    for automated enforcement.
4. To identify issues to improve existing automated
    enforcement systems.
5. To provide a checklist to ensure adequate
    consideration is given to issues to assess readiness
    to implement an AE system or improve an existing
    system.
Other illegal behaviours, including disobeying a red
light signal, mobile or cellular phone use, incorrect lane
use, and non-restraint use can also be detected using
an automated enforcement approach. However, this
document applies specifically to automated speed
enforcement, because speed management requires
significant attention worldwide and plays a critical role
in reducing road traffic deaths and injuries.




4    Guide for Determining Readiness for Speed
     Cameras and other Automated Enforcement
2        Background: The critical need to manage speeding and
         the powerful practical value of Automated Enforcement

Speed is a key factor in both crash occurrence and           An irrefutable body of international evidence shows
severity2. Higher speeds increase crash occurrence           that various means of reducing speeds have led
through several mechanisms: by reducing the capacity         to substantial reductions in deaths and injuries.
to stop in time; by reducing manoeuvrability in evading      Conversely, allowing speeds to increase in the absence
a problem; by making it impossible to negotiate curves       of significant road safety improvements causes more
and corners at speeds which are too high for the friction    deaths and injuries. Examples of interventions which
available; and by causing others to misjudge gaps. For       deliver safety benefits include: reducing speed limits7,
example, a vehicle travelling above the speed limit allows   vehicle-based management of speed8, and road
pedestrians less gap to cross the road than expected for     engineering to reduce speeds9.
the distance between the pedestrian and the vehicle.
                                                             However, one of the most effective, evidence-based,
A synthesis of many studies across many countries
                                                             low-cost opportunities to reduce speeds and save
showed that each 1% decrease in speed will result in
                                                             lives and injuries is the introduction of speed cameras
an approximate 4% decrease in deaths (see Figure 1)3.
                                                             combined with the promotion of enforcement activity10.
More recent reviews broadly support the power model,
                                                             For example, evaluation of the first 28 speed cameras
with slightly more distinction between low- and high-
                                                             introduced in the state of New South Wales, Australia,
speed environments4. Therefore, managing speed is
                                                             revealed a 71% reduction in speeding which delivered
vital to achieving strong road safety improvements5, as
                                                             an 89% reduction in deaths at the treated locations11.
well as other benefits such as reducing climate change
                                                             Other studies show consistent though somewhat
effects and the harmful effects of road transport noise6.
                                                             smaller reductions in trauma. Reduced speeds also
                                                             deliver large reductions in fatalities and injuries for
                                                             pedestrians12.
                                                             One of the most effective forms of speed enforcement
                                                             is point-to-point or average speed camera enforcement,
                                                             which measures the average speed of vehicles over
                                                             longer distances, ranging from 1km to over 100km
                                                             lengths. This technology is most suited to stretches
                                                             of roadway, such as motorways or highways, that do
                                                             not have opportunities for drivers to exit or enter the
                                                             roadway between speed check points. This form of AE
                                                             has been shown to be effective at reducing speeds as
                                                             well as in reducing vehicle emissions and noise13.




Figure 1: The relationship between speed, deaths,
injuries, and crash risk, showing that for each 1%
increase in speed there is a 4% increase in deaths
(Source: Synthesis of many international studies by
Nilsson, 2004).




5    Guide for Determining Readiness for Speed
     Cameras and other Automated Enforcement
3        Issues to Consider for Automated
         Speed Enforcement

To be effective, automated speed enforcement requires         the lives, suffering, and economic loss to be saved,
some core background capacities and successful                and should note future evaluations as next steps in
detection levels. These are required to ensure the            demonstrating road safety value to the community.
essential steps in the automated enforcement sequence
are possible. There are other issues which apply more         B. Legislation and policy decisions that may
broadly, such as extent of corruption in a system, and
the extent to which penalties actually deter drivers, but
                                                              be legislated
the specific focus here is on automated enforcement.          Many issues relating to legislation (i.e., laws) and to
                                                              policy (i.e., operational decisions) must be addressed
It is vital that opportunities for road safety benefits
                                                              before implementing an AE system.
through AE are not delayed by waiting for ideal or near
ideal circumstances. High-income and middle-income                Minimal legal requirements for approval based
countries with systems that are not 100% accurate                 on which camera types have been selected (Fixed
(e.g. vehicle registration, vehicle registration plate            cameras, Mobile cameras, Point to Point Speed
identification, and driver licensing records) still run           Control, Red Light/speed cameras, Toll collection
highly effective AE systems. Waiting until the systems            system – known as Type approval)
work extremely well, rather than moving forward with
                                                                  Calibration of equipment – legislation should
reasonable systems, can delay life-saving interventions.
                                                                  include minimum requirements for the legalisation/
However, there are fundamental issues that must be
                                                                  certification/calibration of all devices (e.g.,
addressed to a reasonable degree of performance in
                                                                  periodical recalibration, or recalibration after repair
order to ensure a robust AE system.
                                                                  of a device). Ideally, the certificate of calibration
The following 11 factors identify vital issues and                should have the legal status of proof of accuracy
examples to consider when developing or reviewing an              of the camera for a given time period. This could
AE system.                                                        include maintenance schedules, calibration/testing
                                                                  and recertification to be conducted on a regular,
A. Political                                                      periodic basis (e.g., at least annually) to ensure
                                                                  system accuracy and to support the integrity of
Achieving a reasonable degree of political acceptance of          prosecutions
the road safety value of speed management and AE is
important. The introduction of AE should not be delayed           Owner/driver responsibility (e.g., Owner onus –
by incomplete agreement. Successful speed camera                  described in the section above) and relevant offence
programmes in many countries have continued to save               investigation process
lives and injuries despite vocal opposition. Advice is            Timeliness in processing the initial enforcement
available on how to manage opposition to AE and to                intervention (e.g. statute of limitations).
counter the myths associated with speed management
and AE, including the use of media to promote the life-           Which agency/ies are responsible for funding,
saving value of AE, and policies such as dedicating all           installing and maintaining devices, and for the
or a proportion of revenue from monetary penalties                infringement management system
(fines) to road safety works14.                                   AE can be negatively represented as a mechanism
Achieving political understanding or acceptance of                to raise revenue, rather than a safety measure
administrative and managerial needs is required to                to protect people, especially by the media. This
allow an efficient enforcement system. It is important            negativity can be countered by adopting a policy
for decision makers to understand the role of legislation         of committing all or a proportion of funds received
in assisting with the identification of the offender. A key       from AE to road safety measures (e.g. road
example is using the concept of Owner Onus to ensure              improvements, education) and strongly publicising
that the speeding driver is identified. Owner onus                this commitment.
legislation compels the vehicle’s registered owner to be      It is vital to ensure that appropriate legislation is in place
deemed to be the driver at the time of the offence, or        before an AE system is launched to avoid expensive
to nominate the offending driver via a legal declaration.     and damaging consequences. International experience
Careful briefing of relevant political leaders and of the     identifies the following examples which must be
media are important steps in securing political will for      considered and can be managed with good legislation:
AE. Information should include the scientific evidence,



6    Guide for Determining Readiness for Speed
     Cameras and other Automated Enforcement
    loss of public trust and confidence in the accuracy          Enforcement tolerance thresholds (i.e., a level of
    of devices and fairness of the system - this issue           speed above the posted speed limit that will be
    highlights the importance of exhaustively testing            allowed by the enforcement agency before an
    the accuracy of the system before it is purchased            infringement is issued)
    - the AE system must demonstrate accuracy at all
                                                                 Proportion of enforcement that is overt (visible) and
    times, in complex traffic scenarios and conditions.
                                                                 covert (hidden). Research has shown that a mix of
    Ongoing calibration and system checking must be
                                                                 overt and covert speed cameras generates greater
    built into the maintenance of the programme;
                                                                 road safety benefits than either one alone15
    highly publicised avoidance of penalties – these
                                                                 Public Information about camera operation. For
    experiences of avoiding punishment undermine
                                                                 example, this might include signage to give advance
    the integrity of the system and its ability to deter
                                                                 warning that cameras are operating. Signage could
    offending;
                                                                 be general (e.g., ‘safety cameras used in this area’)
    inability to identify the vehicle and driver – there         or location-specific (e.g., ‘safety camera ahead’). It
    is need for robust enforcement of, and deterrent             might also include the publication of street names
    penalties when vehicle registration plates are not           on which speed enforcement is operating (e.g., via
    displayed, or are obscured or falsified                      police media channels);
    excessive proportion of money from speeding                  Hypothecation of funds (e.g., use of the funds
    infringements going to private camera operating              collected from monetary fines for road safety
    companies.                                                   purposes only);
Other aspects should also be considered and can be               Penalties should increase in severity as the speed
included in legislation or managed at policy level.              detected increases. It is important not to set a
Ideally, these issues should be included in the legislative      single penalty for a speeding offence because this
framework to ensure that public trust and confidence             may encourage drivers to travel at very high speeds
in the system is maintained:                                     because the penalty is no higher at faster speeds.
    Data security needs to be ensured. This covers the        An additional step has been taken in some places to
    full range of data sources including roadside data        assist in improving public confidence and creating
    capture and data transfer offsite for processing,         a mechanism for independent review of automated
    secure storage and data use. There are a number           enforcement operations. Some jurisdictions have
    of ways that data can be securely collected,              established a Speed Camera Commission as an
    transferred, stored and processed (e.g., use of           independent body to oversee complaints/appeals,
    encryption; password/biometric security on data);         and to make sure processes and practices follow
                                                              prescribed policy. Consideration should be given to the
    Data security protocols must manage two risks:
                                                              establishment of this kind of entity.
    1.	 Unauthorised people accessing data
    2.	 Authorised personnel accessing and using data         C. Organisational and funding
        for inappropriate purposes (e.g., removal of
                                                              There is need to determine which agency/agencies
        penalties from offender record). Robust data
                                                              has responsibility for discrete aspects of the system
        security protocols can assist with management
                                                              (for example, police, justice, treasury, road/transport
        of corruption




7    Guide for Determining Readiness for Speed
     Cameras and other Automated Enforcement
agencies or departments). In some countries,                  Installation of cameras at serious crash locations, is a
government agencies have legislated responsibility            good place to start – improvements in crash reductions
for all operations and management. In other places,           in a relatively short time can help increase the credibility
private companies may operate cameras and provide             of AE, public acceptance, and political justification, as
images to government for processing. It is also possible      well as facilitate evaluations to show road safety impact,
that private companies may execute the full range of          particularly in the short term. Focusing on previous
processes, from camera operation to issuing penalties.        serious crash locations is important, however, it should
Consideration must be given to appropriate access             not be the only indicator used to select camera sites.
to relevant data based on which processes are legally         For example, newly built motorways should have AE
allowed to be undertaken by each agency/organisation.         built into them during construction to prevent crashes
                                                              from occurring by ensuring speeds are moderated
The AE system must be financially viable. Funding for
                                                              from the beginning.
establishment, maintenance and ongoing operation
are needed. This can be achieved through government           Not all types of cameras are applicable to be used in
funding and/or public private partnership (PPP) in            all locations. The decision on which type of camera to
which the private sector funds the establishment              be used relates to road infrastructure and alignment,
and operational costs (including maintenance) of the          roadside access, the type of technology selected to
program while receiving a proportion of the money             detect speed (e.g., radar, laser, induction loops), and
from speeding fines. Allowing this proportion of funds        the desired mix of mobile/fixed speed enforcement.
to be too high may generate public objection to and
                                                              Ideal camera sites should:
mistrust of the program.
                                                                 have a history of serious injury crashes - but not
It is vital that a sufficiently resourced processing centre
                                                                 at the expense of waiting for serious crashes to
is established to allow for a high proportion of offences
                                                                 occur on newly built roads as described earlier. It
to be detected, and infringement notices issued and
                                                                 is important not to focus solely on serious speed-
prosecuted, so as to create deterrence from speeding.
                                                                 related crashes, because many jurisdictions struggle
At a minimum, consideration must be given to meeting
                                                                 to identify speed as a significant contributing factor
the ongoing costs related to maintaining and sustaining
                                                                 to a crash because of minimal crash investigation
the operation of the system and the processing centre.
                                                                 training
                                                                 have a history of speeding / high risk behaviour (as
D. Site Selection and Camera Installation
                                                                 above – new roads should have it built in from the
Site selection: There is need to consider a range of             beginning);
issues when selecting sites to install AE devices. Primary
                                                                 allow for accurate measurement of speed for the
consideration should be given to maximising road
                                                                 location
safety outcomes and should include:
                                                                 facilitate general deterrence (i.e., deter as many
    sites with a serious crash history (supported by
                                                                 people as possible from speeding) – there should
    relevant crash data),
                                                                 be requirements for cameras to be deployed/
    speed profiles that are high or excessive (supported         operated for a defined number of hours to ensure
    by relevant speed data), and                                 they operate with sufficient regularity to optimise
    the proactive/predictive identification of potential         the deterrence of speeding. Where legislatively
    crash sites.                                                 possible, enforcement should be deployed across
                                                                 the road network in a random nature. This random
                                                                 allocation will help increase the perception of
                                                                 detection, because drivers will be less likely to guess
                                                                 camera locations which can maximise the deterrent
                                                                 effect. However, the inclusion of serious crash
                                                                 locations is important to facilitate demonstration
                                                                 of early wins through crash, injury and deaths
                                                                 reductions;
                                                                 allow for safe operation (including safety of
                                                                 personnel conducting calibration, maintenance and
                                                                 data retrieval, if necessary);
                                                                 provide access to power supply and appropriate
                                                                 data transfer capability;
                                                                 allow for accurate measurement of speed and
                                                                 readable images to be collected (consider position
                                                                 in relation to rising/setting sun; roadside barriers,
                                                                 and vehicle trajectory etc);

8    Guide for Determining Readiness for Speed
     Cameras and other Automated Enforcement
    allow for unchallengeable speed measurement               correctly mounted, unobscured and legible. Experience
    (consider positioning the camera at an appropriate        from some countries shows that if people realise that
    distance from the speed limit signs following a           there is a high likelihood of them being detected for
    change in speed limit)                                    speeding by AE, there may be a rise in unregistered
    allow for detection and recording of motorcycle           vehicles or vehicles displaying false registration plates.
    speeding and motorcycle registration details              This risk can be managed by ensuring strong, high
                                                              profile on-road enforcement of vehicle registration
    allow for security of the camera itself from              non-compliance, including sufficient penalties to deter
    vandalism, possibly including installation of             offending.
    monitoring equipment to watch cameras
    Allow for continuing suppression of serious crashes       G. Linking vehicle to registered owner and
    but retaining cameras at locations where they work        contacting the registered owner when an
    and serious crashes are reduced. Cameras can also
                                                              infringement is issued
    be installed on a temporary basis to control speeds
    at specific sites, such as in roadwork zones.             There must be a system to enable linkage of a detected
                                                              vehicle to the vehicle’s registered owner. Legislation
For countries with large proportion of 2 wheelers (e.g.,
                                                              must ensure a vehicle’s registered owner provides their
motorcycles/scooters), sites should allow appropriate
                                                              full name and contact details to the vehicle registering
detection opportunities, including use of cameras that
                                                              authority and provides timely updates when this
are able to detect motorcycles among other traffic.
                                                              information changes (e.g., compelling vehicle owners
                                                              to update a change of address or transfer of ownership
E. Camera maintenance and calibration                         of the vehicle). Good practice shows that there needs to
Regular assessment, validation and maintenance of             be a timeframe (e.g., 1 week to 1 month) to notify the
equipment/technology needs to be conducted (e.g.,             authority that a change has occurred and that suitable
cameras to be physically inspected every 4 weeks) and         penalties are in place to ensure/support compliance.
funded from operational budgets or required as part
of a private partner contract. Best practice calibration      H. Delivering enforcement notice to relevant
must occur safely and regularly (at least annually) or        offender (investigation/adjudication)
after repair and should be conducted by an independent
institution (e.g., Main Measurement Office or Office of       Once the owner of the vehicle has been identified and
Metrology). Calibration requirements should be set in         the offence has been validated, an infringement can be
legislation, and evidence of them should be legislated to     sent. This process can occur in a range of ways (e.g.,
be proof of accuracy of the device. For example, in some      postal mail, email, sms). Ideally, the delivery would
countries, when an AE device is checked and calibrated,       include a mechanism to confirm that the owner received
a certificate of accuracy is issued for that device with an   the infringement. In some instances, the registered
expiry date. Presentation of that certificate to a court is   owner may not have been the offending driver so a
legislated to be evidence of the accuracy of the device.      process for identifying the driver is needed. There are 2
                                                              ways that jurisdictions generally handle this issue:

F. Unique identification of vehicle from an 1.	 Facial recognition is used to identify the driver and
                                                issue the infringement.
image (vehicle registration /identification)
                                                              2.	 Owner onus legislation.
An AE system needs to be able to provide unique
identification of each vehicle, including motorcycles         A facial recognition system requires an extensive
(which may require dedicated technology or mounting),         database of every licensed driver, including an image
so that an offence notice can be issued. This is done by      of their face. Front-facing cameras that take a picture
taking a photograph of the registration or licence plate      of the driver’s face and the vehicle registration plate
and linking that image to a record of registered vehicles.    are needed. This may mean that two different cameras
To achieve this, there must be a high proportion of           are required at each location. This system requires a
registered vehicles displaying plates that accurately         process by which the facial image of the offender is
reflect the associated vehicle, and that are legible in the   compared with all facial images of all registered drivers
image taken by a camera. This could occur by a person         in the database to find a match to the offending driver.
who adjudicates on the image, or by the use of ANPR.          There are several challenges associated with this
The effectiveness of this process requires a reasonable       system: 1) it may not be possible to identify drivers
proportion of all vehicles to be registered and to display    registered in another jurisdiction, 2) there may be
authorised registration plates. Sufficient legislation        privacy concerns linked to photographing faces, and 3)
should also exist to deter the fraudulent or improper         identifying motorcycle riders wearing full face helmets
use of registration or licence plates.                        or drivers/riders wearing other face coverings such
                                                              as cultural or religious headdress, or a driver wearing
It is vital that legislation compels all vehicles to be
                                                              sunglasses.
registered and display registration plates that are

9    Guide for Determining Readiness for Speed
     Cameras and other Automated Enforcement
Due to these challenges, owner onus provisions are           with a report of the violation or at any time during the
considered a better option and should be adopted in          proceedings) to avoid complaints and legal challenge.
policy and legislation to enable better identification
of offending drivers. Owner onus provisions allow the        J. Process to ensure the penalty is applied
vehicle owner, if not the driver at the time the offence
was committed, to nominate the offending driver
                                                             and managing repeat offenders
via a legal declaration and then the infringement is         A system to ensure that non-payment of penalty is
subsequently withdrawn and reissued to the nominated         followed up and resolved expeditiously is needed. This
driver. Legislation should include a serious penalty for     can be achieved in various ways. Some jurisdictions
false declarations by registered owners and compel the       offer an incentive for penalty payment, such as a
registered owner to nominate/report who was driving          discount if paid within a month. Other jurisdictions
at the time of the offence.                                  apply an additional penalty for late payment. If a driver
                                                             fails to pay the penalty, legislation should include a
There are some challenges related to identifying
                                                             provision to enforce payment. This may include a
drivers of company-owned vehicles and leased or hire
                                                             notice for the accused to appear in court with severe
vehicles. A number of solutions exist which have been
                                                             penalties for failure to appear in court (e.g., an arrest
implemented in various jurisdictions to overcome
                                                             warrant). In some jurisdictions, any unpaid penalties
those challenges, such as the registration of every
                                                             disallow transaction with government agencies (e.g.,
vehicle having to include the name of the person
                                                             cannot register a vehicle or renew a driver licence until
who is nominated by a company as the responsible
                                                             penalties are fully paid).
holder of the vehicle, or keeping formal records (such
as electronic or paper logbooks) when a vehicle has          Good practice includes a mechanism to manage repeat
been allocated to an employee or is leased or hired by       or recidivist offenders. Repeat offenders should not be
a third party. Owner-onus provisions can be applied          allowed to continue paying the same (minimal) penalty
to companies, with substantially larger penalties for        each time they offend. The penalty should escalate
failure to nominate a driver in the case of companies.       to deter further offending and be proportionate to
                                                             the severity of the offence (e.g., increasing monetary
I. System to manage offence contestability                   fines, loss of demerit points (points which are recorded
                                                             against a driver’s license and lead to license suspension
Procedural justice is a fundamental element of an AE         when a criterion level of points are accrued), loss of
system. A judicial system should exist within legislation    licence, vehicle impoundment or jail). Evidence shows
allowing a driver accused of speeding or other illegal       that speeding offenders are also likely to commit other
behaviour to legally challenge the offence. This may         traffic violations and other crimes, as well as have a
include a system by which a case may be made in              higher risk of future serious crashes16.
writing to police or appropriate authority and allowance
for the accused driver to have the case heard before a       For general deterrence (and thus improvement of the
judicial officer, such as a judge or magistrate in a court   behaviour of road users) to be achieved, the penalties
of law. Provision to enable a challenge or review of the     received must be set appropriately. This issue is not
alleged offence should be identified/included on the         covered here but is the subject of another guide being
infringement notice. It is also important to ensure that     developed by GRSP.
evidence to successfully prosecute defended cases
is robust, because prosecution failures through poor         K. Evaluation          to    show      road      safety
evidence collection and presentation of the evidence         improvements
have the potential to undermine the AE programme.
For example, it is worth considering providing the           A well-managed automated speed enforcement
owner of the vehicle with a photo of the offence (along      program will deliver positive road safety outcomes,
                                                             including significant cost-benefit outcomes through
                                                             reduced death, injury and risk exposure. Being able to
                                                             demonstrate such benefits of an AE system is important
                                                             for a number of reasons:
                                                             1.	 Convincing decision makers of the value of speed
                                                                 management and AE;
                                                             2.	 Communicating safety improvements to the public;
                                                             3.	 Expanding and refining the AE system.
                                                             Evaluations need to be planned from the beginning of a
                                                             camera programme to ensure that baseline speed and
                                                             crash data can be collected, and that funding is made
                                                             available for the evaluation research17.



10   Guide for Determining Readiness for Speed
     Cameras and other Automated Enforcement
4        References


1
  Tingvall, C., & Haworth, N. (1999). Vision Zero–An ethical approach to safety and mobility. Paper
presented to the 6th International Conference Road Safety & Traffic Enforcement: Beyond 2000.
Job, RFS. Re-invigorating and refining Safe System advocacy. Journal of the Australasian College of Road
Safety, 28 (1), 64-68.
2
  Elvik, R. (2005). Speed and Road Safety: Synthesis of evidence from evaluation studies. Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1908, 59–69.
Job, RFS & Sakashita, S. (2016). Management of speed: The low-cost, rapidly implementable effective
road safety action to deliver the 2020 road safety targets. Journal of the Australasian College of Road
Safety, May 2016, 65-70.
3
 Nilsson, G. (2004). Traffic Safety Dimension and the Power Model to describe the Effect of Speed on
Safety. Lund Institute of Technology, Sweden.
4
 Elvik, R. (2009). The Power Model of the relationship between speed and road safety: Update and new
analyses. Report No. 1034/2009. ARRB Group Limited, Melbourne.
5
 Global Road Safety Partnership (2008). Speed Management: A Road Safety Manual for decision makers
and practitioners. Geneva: World Health Organisation/Global Road Safety Partnership (WHO/GRSP),
2008.
Job, RFS & Sakashita, S. (2016). Management of speed: The low-cost, rapidly implementable effective
road safety action to deliver the 2020 road safety targets. Journal of the Australasian College of Road
Safety, 72 (2), 65-70.
World Health Organization (WHO) (2010) Data systems: a road safety manual for decision-makers and
practitioners. WHO: Geneva.
6
  Cameron, M. (2003). Potential benefits and costs of speed changes on rural roads. Report CR216.
Monash University Accident Research Centre, Victoria Australia.
Job, RFS & Sakashita, S. (2016). Management of speed: The low-cost, rapidly implementable effective
road safety action to deliver the 2020 road safety targets. Journal of the Australasian College of Road
Safety, May 2016, 65-70.
Gomez H.M., Job S, Adriazola-Steil, C., Wegman F., Bezabeh G., Bradford J., et al. (2017). Chapter 4:
Safety, in Global Mobility Report 2017. Washington, DC: Sustainable Mobility for All.
7
  de Roos, M. and Marsh, F. (2017). Speed limits: Getting the limit right – the first step in effective Speed
Management. Journal of the Australasian College of Road Safety, 28(2), 55-59
Graham, A. & Sparkes, P. (2010). Casualty reductions in NSW associated with the 40 km/h school zone
initiative. 2010 Australasian Road Safety, Research, Policing and Education Conference 2 31 August – 3
September 2010, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory.
Sliogeris, J. (1992). 110 kilometre per hour speed limit-evaluation of road safety effects.
Stuster, J., Coffman, Z. & Warren, D. (1998). Synthesis of safety research related to speed and speed
management. Publication no. FHWA-RD-98-154.
8
 Carsten, OMJ., Fowkes, M., Lai, F., Chorlton, K., Jamson, S., Tate, FN., Simpkin, R. (2008). Intelligent speed
adaptation: Final report to Department for Transport. June 2008. University of Leeds and MIRA Ltd.
Varhelyi, A. (2002). Speed management via in-car devices: effects, implications, perspectives.
Transportation 29, 237–252.
9
 Huang, J., Liu, P., Zhang, X., Wan, J., and Li, Z. (2011). Evaluating the Speed Reduction Effectiveness of
Speed Bump on Local Streets. ICCTP 2011: pp. 2348-2357.
http://ascelibrary.org/doi/abs/10.1061/41186(421)234
Makwasha, T. and Turner, B. (2017). Safety of raised platforms on urban roads. Journal of the Australasian
College of Road Safety, 28(2), 20-27.



11   Guide for Determining Readiness for Speed
     Cameras and other Automated Enforcement
Mountain, L.J. , Hirst, W.M., and Maher, M.J. (2005). Are speed enforcement cameras more effective than
other speed management measures?: The impact of speed management schemes on 30 mph roads”.
Accident Analysis & Prevention. 37(4), 742-754.
Turner, B., Makwasha, T. and Hillier, P. (2017). Infrastructure treatments for managing speeds on rural
and urban arterial roads. Journal of the Australasian College of Road Safety, 28(2), 13-20.
10
   Wilson, C., Willis, C., Hendrikz, J.K., Le Brocque, R., Bellam,y N. Speed cameras for the prevention of
road traffic injuries and deaths. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2010, Issue 11. Art. No.:
CD004607. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD004607.pub4.
Li, R., El-Basyouny, K., Kim, A., and Gargoum, S. (2017). Relationship between road safety and mobile photo
enforcement performance indicators: A case study of the city of Edmonton. Journal of Transportation
Safety & Security, 9(2):195-215,
Global Road Safety Partnership (2008). Speed Management: A Road Safety Manual for decision makers
and practitioners. Geneva: World Health Organisation/Global Road Safety Partnership (WHO/GRSP),
2008.
Soole, D.W., Watson, B.C., & Fleiter, J.J. (2014). A review of international speed enforcement policies and
practices: Evidence-based recommendations for best practice. In Ahram, T., Karwowski, W., & Marek,
T. (Eds.) Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Applied Human and Ergonomics, AHFE
International, Krakow, Poland. https://eprints.qut.edu.au/75877/2/75877.pdf
11
   Job, RFS & Sakashita, S. (2016). Management of speed: The low-cost, rapidly implementable effective
road safety action to deliver the 2020 road safety targets. Journal of the Australasian College of Road
Safety, May 2016, 65-70.
12
  World Health Organization (WHO) (2013). Pedestrian Safety: A road safety manual for decision-makers
and practitioners. WHO: Geneva.
13
  Soole, D.W., Watso,n B.C., & Fleiter, J.J. (2013). Effects of average speed enforcement on speed
compliance and crashes: A review of the literature. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 54, 46–56.
Montella, A., Imbriani, L. L., Marzano, V., & Mauriello, F. (2015). Effects on speed and safety of point-
to-point speed enforcement systems: evaluation on the urban motorway A56 Tangenziale di Napoli.
Accident Analysis & Prevention, 75, 164-178.
14
  Fleiter, J.J. & Watson, B. (2012). Automated speed enforcement in Australia: Recent examples of the
influence of public opinion on program sustainability. Journal of the Australasian College of Road Safety,
23(3), pp. 59-66. https://eprints.qut.edu.au/56151/2/56151.pdf.
Fleiter, JJ., Lewis, I., Kaye, S., Soole, D., Rakotonirainy, A., & Debnath, A. (2016) Public Demand for Safer
Speeds: Identification of Interventions for Trial. Austroads Ltd., Sydney, N.S.W.
Job, RFS., Sakashita, C., Mooren, L., Grzebieta, R. (2013). Community Perceptions and Beliefs Regarding
Low Level Speeding and Suggested Solutions. Proceedings of the TRB Annual Meeting, Washington DC,
January 2013.
15
  Cameron, M. H. (2008). Development of Strategies for Best Practice in Speed Enforcement in Western
Australia. Supplementary Report. Melbourne: Monash University Accident Research Centre.
Keall, M. Povey, LJ, Frith, WJ. (2001). The relative effectiveness of a hidden versus a visible speed camera
programme. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 33 (2), 277–284.
16
  Watson, B., Siskind, V., Fleiter, J.J., Watson, A., & Soole, D. (2015) Assessing specific deterrence effects
of increased speeding penalties using four measures of recidivism. Accident Analysis and Prevention,
84, pp. 27-37.
17
  Global Road Safety Partnership (2008). Speed Management: A Road Safety Manual for decision
makers and practitioners. Geneva: World Health Organisation/Global Road Safety Partnership (WHO/
GRSP), 2008.
World Health Organization (WHO) (2010) Data systems: a road safety manual for decision-makers and
practitioners. WHO: Geneva.




12   Guide for Determining Readiness for Speed
     Cameras and other Automated Enforcement
5        Checklist for determining readiness for speed
         cameras and other automated enforcement

Use this checklist to:
     assess your level of readiness to implement AE, and
     determine what actions need to be taken to improve identified issues to allow an effective system to be implemented.


                                                                                   Questions to consider for                                 How?
 Issues to consider                      Minimum requirements                     additional steps to add value                    Where to find information
                                                                                   (if possible, not essential)                         in this guide?
  Political                     Do decision makers understand the road        Is there a policy to dedicate revenue to road   How? Use evidence to demonstrate
                                safety benefits of managing speeds?           safety activities?                              effectiveness of speed enforcement in
                                                                                                                              reducing speeds and reducing crashes.
                                Do decision makers accept the value of
                                AE?                                                                                           Refer to:
                                                                                                                              Section 3. Background – The critical need
                                Is there sufficient political acceptance to
                                                                                                                              to manage speeding and the powerful
                                introduce an AE program?
                                                                                                                              practical value of AE
                                Is there appreciation of the potential
                                                                                                                              Section 3A. Political
                                income    for    Government    (which
                                could be used for further road safety
                                improvements)?

  Legislation and               Does legislation identify which agency/       Is there Owner Onus provision in the            How? Address in legislation and policies
  policy decisions              agencies have responsibility for various      legislation?
                                                                                                                              Refer to:
  that may be                   parts of the AE system?
                                                                              Is there a policy on the enforcement            Section 3A. Political
  legislated
                                Do you have approval to use camera            tolerance threshold?
                                                                                                                              Section 3B. Legislation and policy
                                equipment type (type approval)?
                                                                              Is there a proportion of the enforcement        decisions that may be legislated
                                Is there a legal process to identify the      that can be conducted covertly (hidden)?
                                                                                                                              Refer to:
                                vehicle and the driver?
                                                                              Is there a policy on communication about        Section 3F. Unique identification
                                Is there a legal process to prosecute an      AE operation (e.g., mass media promotion;       of vehicle from an image (vehicle
                                offender?                                     general or location-specific signage of         registration/identification)
                                                                              cameras; visibility of cameras);

13   Guide for Determining Readiness for Speed
     Cameras and other Automated Enforcement
                                                                                       Questions to consider for                                   How?
 Issues to consider                      Minimum requirements                         additional steps to add value                      Where to find information
                                                                                       (if possible, not essential)                           in this guide?

                                 Do organisations that need access to AE-        Is there provision for a certificate of accuracy
                                 generated data; driver licensing data; and      of equipment to override legal challenges
                                 vehicle registration data have the legal        based on inaccurate equipment?
                                 right to access it?
                                                                                 Has a decision been made to commit money
                                 Are there data security policies and            from speed camera-detected fines to road
                                 protocols to:                                   safety?
                                  1.	 secure roadside data capture and           Are there penalties for driving an unregistered
                                      transfer?                                  vehicle? Are there penalties for not having a
                                  2.	 secure storage and use?                    visible legible registration plate?
                                  3.	 prevent unauthorised access?
                                 Is there a policy relating to cameras being
                                 fit for purpose (e.g., to operate effectively
                                 in the environment where they’ll be used
                                 such as will they operate in extreme heat,
                                 cold or humidity?
                                 Are registration plates generally clearly
                                 visible at high speeds or in low light?)

 Organisational                  Is   there  government       funding     to     Is the amount of money collected from              How? Address in legislation and policies
 & funding issues                develop and sustain an AE program,              speeding infringements being paid to a
                                                                                                                                    Refer to:
                                 or a partnership with private sector            private company operator proportional to
                                                                                                                                    Section 3C. Organisational and funding
                                 through which government funding is             the services provided by that company?
                                 not necessary? (Either one is sufficient to
                                 answer Yes)
                                 Do organisations that need access to AE-
                                 generated data; driver licensing data; and
                                 vehicle registration data have the means
                                 to access it?
                                 Is there sufficient offence processing
                                 capacity to deal with volume of
                                 infringements within a reasonable time?


14   Guide for Determining Readiness for Speed
     Cameras and other Automated Enforcement
                                                                                      Questions to consider for                                  How?
 Issues to consider                      Minimum requirements                        additional steps to add value                     Where to find information
                                                                                      (if possible, not essential)                          in this guide?

                                 Is the infringement notice processing
                                 system compatible with and able to
                                 process notices generated by the intended
                                 automated technology?

 Site Selection and              Do all camera sites allow for accurate         Are there accurate data on fatal and serious      How? Address in legislation and policy
 Camera Installation             speed detection and readable images to         injury crashes available to use as a basis of
                                                                                                                                  Refer to:
                                 be collected? (consider position in relation   site selection?
                                                                                                                                  Section 3D. Site Selection and Camera
                                 to rising/setting sun; roadside barriers,
                                                                                Have camera installations been managed to         Installation
                                 change of speed limits for certain times of
                                                                                avoid increasing the crash risk (e.g., location
                                 day e.g. school zones)
                                                                                choices that minimise risk; protective barriers
                                 Do all camera sites allow for safe operation   and safety infrastructure to prevent a vehicle
                                 and maintenance?                               colliding with a speed camera pole)
                                 Are cameras mounted such that the              Have the track records of potential speed
                                 mounting does not contribute to inaccurate     camera providers been assessed for system
                                 speed recording or data capture?               durability and maintenance? (This could
                                                                                include conducting in-depth reference
                                                                                checking of the system provider including
                                                                                personal visits to existing product users to
                                                                                test manufacturer claims).
                                                                                Is there a remote device checking system
                                                                                available to monitor device integrity?


 Camera                          Is there a protocol and appropriate            Is the calibration carried out by           an    How? Address in legislation and policy
 maintenance &                   resources for maintenance of cameras?          independent authorised organisation?
                                                                                                                                  Refer to:
 calibration
                                 Is there a protocol and appropriate            If operated by a private company, are             Section 3C. Organisational and funding
                                 resources for calibration of cameras?          maintenance and calibration requirements
                                                                                                                                  Section 3D. Site Selection and Camera
                                                                                specified?
                                                                                                                                  Installation
                                                                                                                                  Section 3E. Camera maintenance and
                                                                                                                                  calibration


15   Guide for Determining Readiness for Speed
     Cameras and other Automated Enforcement
                                                                                       Questions to consider for                                How?
 Issues to consider                      Minimum requirements                         additional steps to add value                   Where to find information
                                                                                       (if possible, not essential)                        in this guide?

 Unique                          Is there a reasonable proportion of all         Is there sufficient enforcement and penalties   How? Address in legislation and with
 identification of               vehicles registered?                            to deter widespread failure to appropriately    enforcement and robust penalty regime
 vehicle from an                                                                 display registration plates?
                                 Is there a reasonable proportion of                                                             Refer to:
 image (vehicle
                                 registered vehicles correctly displaying                                                        Section 3F. Unique identification
 registration /
                                 camera-readable      vehicle    registration                                                    of vehicle from an image (vehicle
 identification)
                                 plates that uniquely identify that vehicle?                                                     registration /identification)
                                 Is legislation in place that compels
                                 vehicle registration plates to be correctly
                                 positioned so that they can be detected by
                                 a speed camera, unobscured and legible
                                 that deters drivers from attempting to
                                 evade speed camera detection?

 Linking vehicle                 Is there a reasonable proportion of vehicle     Is there legislation to ensure vehicle owners   How? Address in legislation and having
 to owner and                    registration records that accurately reflect    provide timely updates when their personal      robust database in place
 contacting the                  the rightful owner?                             information changes or when there is
                                                                                                                                 Refer to:
 owner when an                                                                   transfer of vehicle ownership?
                                 Is there a system to enable linkage of a                                                        Section 3G. Linking vehicle to registered
 infringement is
                                 detected vehicle to the vehicle owner?                                                          owner and contacting the registered
 issued
                                                                                                                                 owner when an infringement is issued
                                 Is there legislation to ensure vehicle
                                 owners provide their full name and contact
                                 details to the vehicle registering authority?

 Delivering                      Is there a system by which the owner can        Are there owner onus provisions to allow        How? Address in legislation
 enforcement notice              be contacted to receive the infringement        the vehicle owner to nominate the offending
 to relevant offender            notice?                                         driver via a legally binding declaration?       Refer to:
 (investigation/                                                                                                                 Section 3H. Delivering enforcement
                                 Is there a process to identify the offending    Is there legislation, enforcement and serious   notice to relevant offender
 adjudication)
                                 driver if not the owner?                        penalty for false declarations by vehicle       (investigation/adjudication)
                                                                                 owners?
                                                                                 Is there an obligation on owners to know
                                                                                 and report who was driving at the time of the
                                                                                 offence?


16   Guide for Determining Readiness for Speed
     Cameras and other Automated Enforcement
                                                                                     Questions to consider for                                How?
 Issues to consider                      Minimum requirements                       additional steps to add value                   Where to find information
                                                                                     (if possible, not essential)                        in this guide?

 System to                       Is there a process to allow a driver           Is this challenge process well known to the    How? Address in legislation
 manage offence                  accused of speeding to legally challenge       public?
                                                                                                                               Refer to:
 contestability                  the offence?
                                                                                                                               Section 3I. System to manage offence
                                                                                                                               contestability

 Process to ensure               Is there a process by which non-payment        Does the penalty increase with delays in       How? Address in legislation and policies.
 penalty is applied              of penalty can be followed up and              payment?
                                                                                                                               Refer to:
 and managing                    resolved?
                                                                                Is there a process to manage repeat            Section 3J. Process to ensure the
 repeat offenders
                                                                                offenders?                                     penalty is applied and managing repeat
                                                                                                                               offenders


 Penalties for                   Are the penalties for speeding sufficient      Do penalties escalate for repeat offences?     How? Address in legislation and policy
 speeding are                    to deter speeding?
                                                                                Is there an increased penalty for company      Refer to:
 appropriate
                                 Do penalties increase in severity as the       vehicles?                                      Section 3J. Process to ensure the
                                 speed detected increases?                                                                     penalty is applied and managing repeat
                                 Penalties can be too high, generating                                                         offenders
                                 Police reluctance to apply them. Is this
                                 risk managed?
                                 Is there a mechanism for applying a
                                 penalty for falsely accepting responsibility
                                 for the offence (e.g., fraudulent use of
                                 demerit points belonging to another
                                 person)?

 Evaluation to                   Is there a plan to evaluate the safety         What are community views of automated          How? Address in legislation and policy and
 show road safety                outcomes of the AE system?                     speed enforcement? Do views change             through Community attitudes surveys
 improvements                                                                   (improve) over time?
                                 Is there funding for evaluation?                                                              Refer to: Section 3K
                                                                                Does the evaluation offer the opportunity to   Evaluation to show            road       safety
                                 Will baseline speed and crash data be
                                                                                defend speed cameras on the basis of safety    improvements
                                 collected for this evaluation?                 improvements?


17   Guide for Determining Readiness for Speed
     Cameras and other Automated Enforcement
