=== p.1 ===
Impacts of Trafﬁc Calming
REID EWING
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
3685 Mt. Diablo Blvd.
Lafayette, CA 94549
r.ewing@fehrandpeers.com
or
Surface Transportation Policy Project
1100 17th St., NW, 10th Floor
Washington, D.C. 20036
rewing@transact.org
ABSTRACT
This paper quantiﬁes the kinds of impacts resulting from trafﬁc calming measures of
various types. Descriptive statistics on speed, volume, and collision changes following
trafﬁc calming are derived from hundreds of before-and-after studies. Using the same
data sets, impact models are estimated. While impacts are case-speciﬁc, trafﬁc calming
measures generally have the desired effect of reducing speeds, volumes, and collisions.
INTRODUCTION
This paper is about impacts of various types resulting from different trafﬁc calming
measures. To the extent possible, the impacts of different measures are quantiﬁed and
impact models are estimated for use by trafﬁc managers.
This research is part of a national study of trafﬁc calming for the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) and Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). The
study’s principal work product, Trafﬁc Calming State-of-the-Art (SOA), includes a chapter
on impacts of trafﬁc management measures generally, including speed enforcement and
education activities, trafﬁc regulatory measures, and psycho-perception measures (1). The
SOA report covers a range of trafﬁc calming impacts—including impacts on crime,
property values, street life, and noise. In this paper, the focus is on speed, volume, and
safety impacts of trafﬁc calming measures only, deﬁned in the SOA report as changes in
street alignment, installation of barriers, and other physical measures to reduce trafﬁc
speeds and/or cut-through volumes, in the interest of street safety, livability, and other
public purposes. Volume control measures use barriers to block trafﬁc in some direction,
thereby intentionally diverting it to alternate routes. Speed control measures use changes in
alignment and roadway narrowing to simply slow trafﬁc along a route.
Practical Value of Impact Analysis
Portland, Oregon’s North Ida Avenue project illustrates the practical value of impact
analysis. The ﬁrst phase of the project installed 14-foot speed humps at three locations
I-1 / 1

=== p.2 ===
I-1 / 2
TRB Circular E-C019: Urban Street Symposium
and chokers (curb extensions) at two locations. These were followed by the narrowing 
of travel lanes to make room for bicycle lanes.
As shown in Figure 1, 85th percentile speeds declined by 4 to 7 mph with ﬁrst
phase improvements, and by another 2 to 5 mph in the second phase. This brought 
85th percentile speeds down to the speed limit of 25 mph at certain locations, and close 
to it at others. Daily trafﬁc volumes also dropped, by an average of 130 vehicles per day
(vpd). Under Portland’s diversion policy, trafﬁc increases of up to 150 vpd are deemed
acceptable on parallel local streets. In this case, diverted trafﬁc was within the city’s
policy limits. Also, speed measurements on parallel streets showed no increase,
something that often accompanies diversion.
IMPACTS ON SPEEDS
Hundreds of before-and-after studies were collected for the ITE/FHWA study. These
individual studies have been used to generate summary statistics on speed impacts by type
of measure. Three measures of impact are summarized in Table 1—average 85th percentile
speed after treatment, average absolute change in 85th percentile speed from before to after
treatment, and average percentage change in 85th percentile speed from before to after
treatment. Standard deviations from these averages are also presented in Table 1 to give
some idea of the variability of results across studies. Of all trafﬁc calming measures, speed
humps have the greatest impact on 85th percentile speeds, reducing them by an average of
more than 7 mph or 20 percent. Among speed control measures, raised intersections and
narrowings have the least impact. Interestingly, half closures, a volume control measure,
have an impact on speeds comparable to speed tables.
One enormous caveat: Rarely in before-and-after studies is it made clear where
speed measurements were taken. Occasionally a study will report “midpoint” or
“midblock” speeds, but since the spacing of slow points or the length of blocks is
unknown, the exact location of measurements is also unknown. The after-speeds may be
100 feet from slow points, 200 feet, or some other distance. Obviously, where the
measurement is taken has a profound effect on the result, since motorists decelerate as
they approach slow points and accelerate as they depart them. Summary statistics of this
sort provide, at best, ballpark estimates of impacts.
FIGURE 1
85th percentile speeds
before and after trafﬁc calming on
N. Ida Avenue (Portland, Oregon).

=== p.3 ===
Ewing
I-1 / 3
Sample
Size
Average Speed After
Traffic Calming
(standard deviation
from the average)
Average Change in Speed
with Traffic 
(standard deviation 
from the average)
Average % Change in
Speed with Traffic
Calming
(standard deviation from
the average)
12' Humps
179
27.4 mph
(4.0 mph)
-7.6 mph
(3.5 mph)
-22%
(-9%)
14' Humps
15
25.6
(2.1)
-7.7
(2.1)
-23
(6)
22' Tables
58
30.1
(7.7)
-6.6
(3.7)
-18
(8)
Longer Tables
10
31.6
(2.8)
-3.2
(2.4)
-9
(7)
Raised Intersections
3
34.3
(6.0)
-.3
(3.8)
-1
(10)
Circles
45
30.2
(4.3)
-3.9
(3.2)
-11
(10)
Narrowings
7
32.3
(2.8)
-2.6
(5.5)
-4
(22)
One-Lane Slow Points
5
28.6
(3.1)
-4.8
(1.3)
-14
(4)
Half Closures
16
26.3
(5.2)
-6.0
(3.6)
-19
(11)
Diagonal Diverters
7
27.9
(5.2)
-1.4
(4.7)
-0
(17)
Calming
TABLE 1
Speed Impacts of Trafﬁc Calming Measures
Also, the exact date of measurement is seldom known. The “before” measurement
may be one month or three years before installation, the “after” measurement one week or
two years afterward. The exact time of measurement may affect results due to the natural
growth of trafﬁc and the tendency of travelers to adjust to the new measures. Results from
Austin suggest that effects grow over time. Results from Bellevue suggest the opposite.
The sheer number of studies precluded any follow-up with jurisdictions to acquire more
complete information.
A ﬁnal caveat: While sample sizes for some measures are large, and sample
averages are thus likely to be close to true averages by virtue of the law of large numbers,
sample sizes for other measures are minuscule. Our sample includes 179 studies of 12-foot
humps, but only 3 studies of raised intersections. The sampling error is accordingly many
times greater for raised intersections than for 12-foot humps.
Determinants of Trafﬁc Speed
Speed impacts of trafﬁc calming measures depend primarily on geometrics and spacing.
Geometrics determine the speeds at which motorists travel through slow points. Spacing
determines the extent to which motorists speed up between slow points.

=== p.4 ===
I-1 / 4
TRB Circular E-C019: Urban Street Symposium
The effects of geometrics and spacing are captured in Figures 2 and 3, prepared by
Portland’s Bureau of Trafﬁc Management. Fourteen-foot speed humps are used on local
streets; 22-foot speed tables (ﬂat-topped humps) are used on neighborhood collectors and
local streets serving as transit routes. Before they were trafﬁc calmed, streets treated with
14-foot speed humps had 85th percentile speeds averaging 32 mph. After trafﬁc calming,
85th percentile speeds fell to about 21 mph at the humps themselves, 26 mph a hundred
feet upstream, and 25 mph one hundred feet downstream. Streets treated with 22-foot
speed tables originally had 85th percentile speeds averaging 40 mph. After trafﬁc calming,
85th percentile speeds fell to 27 mph at the tables themselves, 33 mph 100 feet upstream,
and 30 mph 100 feet downstream.
Modeling Midpoint Speeds
For 58 streets in 10 communities, 85th percentile speeds before traffic calming, 
85th percentile speeds at midpoints after traffic calming, and spacing of slow points 
are known. Combined with known crossing speeds at slow points themselves, these are
all the data required to estimate speed models. For traffic calming measures in this
sample, 85th percentile speeds crossing the slow points are approximately:
•
19 mph at 12-foot speed humps,
•
22 mph at 14-foot speed humps,
•
24 mph at 22-foot speed tables with straight ramps, and
•
27 mph at 22-foot speed tables with parabolic ramps.
Partial correlation analysis showed that midpoint speeds after treatment are related to
speeds before treatment, speeds at the slow points themselves, and spacing of slow
points. Indeed, midpoint speeds are significantly related to each of these variables,
controlling for the others (at the .001, .003, and .001 levels, respectively). To determine
the form of the relationship, midpoint speeds after treatment were modeled using nonlinear
regression and testing different functional forms, reﬂecting different assumptions about
driver deceleration and acceleration between slow points. It had been assumed that the
midpoint speed would equal the 85th percentile speed at the slow points themselves when
slow points are closely spaced, and would rise asymptotically toward the 85th percentile
FIGURE 2
Speed proﬁle for a 14-foot hump
(Portland, Oregon).

=== p.5 ===
Ewing
I-1 / 5
speed of the street (before any trafﬁc calming) as slow points become widely spaced.
The 85th percentile speed of the street is a function of street width, curvature, fronting
land uses, etc., which would continue to limit speeds even with widely spaced slow
points.
As ﬁrst estimated, no functional form seemed to ﬁt the data. The reason, evident
from the speed proﬁles in Figures 2 and 3, is that even with wide spacing of slow points,
speeds after trafﬁc calming do not rise to precalming levels. Thus, functions were
reestimated, again using nonlinear regression, but now assuming that speeds would rise
only part of the way from the speed at slow points to the speed of the street without
treatment (as in Figure 4).
For this sample of streets, midpoint speeds rise as spacing increases, reaching
90 percent of their maximum value at a spacing of 600 feet. For this particular sample,
with slow points spaced anywhere from 218 to 1,410 feet apart, midpoint speeds rise
only 56 percent of the way back to pretreatment levels.
The best-ﬁt curve explains 67 percent of the variation in the dependent variable,
the dependent variable being the difference between midpoint speed and speed at the slow
FIGURE 3
Speed proﬁle for a 22-foot table
(Portland, Oregon).
FIGURE 4
Exponential curve
relating midpoint speed to spacing
(best ﬁt).

=== p.6 ===
point. Given data on speeds before trafﬁc calming, spacing of slow points, and speeds at
slow points, trafﬁc managers can predict midpoint speeds with some conﬁdence.
IMPACTS ON TRAFFIC VOLUMES
The effectiveness of trafﬁc calming measures is also judged by impacts on trafﬁc
volumes. Volume impacts are much more complex and case-speciﬁc than are speed
impacts. They depend on the entire network of which a street is a part, not just the
characteristics of the street itself. The availability of alternate routes and the application
of other measures in areawide treatments may have as large an impact on volumes as do
the geometrics and spacing of slow points.
In particular, volume impacts depend fundamentally on the split between local
and through trafﬁc. This split also affects speeds, but to a lesser degree. Trafﬁc calming
measures will not affect the amount of locally bound trafﬁc unless they are so severe or
restrictive as to “degenerate” motor vehicle trips. The concept of degeneration is a
relatively new one; we are just beginning to understand how raising the generalized costs
of motor vehicle travel can suppress trips. With rare exceptions, trafﬁc calming measures
in the United States are unlikely to be strong enough to affect motor vehicle trip rates.
What trafﬁc calming measures may do instead is to reroute nonlocal trafﬁc.
Hundreds of before-and-after studies have been tapped to generate summary
statistics on volume impacts. Two measures of impact are summarized in Table 2—
average absolute change in daily trafﬁc from before to after treatment, and average
percentage change in daily trafﬁc from before to after treatment. Standard deviations
from these averages are also presented in Table 2 to give some idea of the variability of
results across studies. As expected, the largest volume reductions occur with street
closures and other volume control measures. However, signiﬁcant reductions also occur
with humps and other speed control measures. The distinction between volume controls
and speed controls becomes somewhat blurred in practice.
The same caveats apply to volume impacts as to speed impacts previously. Sample
sizes are very small for some trafﬁc calming measures. Also, results depend on where
measurements are taken, volume impacts being attenuated by intervening intersections.
For example, volumes in the same block as diagonal diverters decline by an average of
45 percent after installation. Volumes a block away, with an intervening intersection,
decline by less than half that percentage.
Determinants of Trafﬁc Volumes
Volume impacts of trafﬁc calming measures depend on the availability and quality of
alternate routes. This much is clear a priori.
For streets calmed with street closures, diverters, and other volume control
measures, impacts would also be expected to depend on which movements are blocked
along a stretch of road or at an intersection. A full closure blocks through trips in both
directions and should have the greatest impact. A half closure blocks through movement in
only one direction and should have an impact about half that of a full closure (discounting
trips with a trip end on a particular street—they will be unaffected). A diagonal diverter
blocks two out of three movements at an intersection; assuming equal before-volumes on
I-1 / 6
TRB Circular E-C019: Urban Street Symposium

=== p.7 ===
Ewing
I-1 / 7
TABLE 2
Volume Impacts of Trafﬁc Calming Measures
Sample
Size
Average Change in
Volume with Traffic
Calming
(standard deviation from
the average)
Average % Change in
Volume with Traffic
Calming
(standard deviation from
the average)
12' Humps
143
-355 vpd
(591)
-18%
(24%)
14' Humps
15
-529
(741)
-22
(26)
22' Tables
46
-415
(649)
-12
(20)
Circles
49
-293
(584)
-5
(46)
Narrowings
11
-263
(2178)
-10
(51)
One-Lane Slow
Points
5
-392
(384)
-20
(19)
Full Closures
19
-671
(786)
-44
(36)
Half Closures
53
-1611
(2444)
-42
(41)
Diagonal
Diverters
47
-501
(622)
-35
(46)
Other Volume
Controls
10
-1167
(1781)
-31
(36)
each approach to the intersection, the impact should be more than that of a half closure but
less than that of a full closure.
For street traffic calmed with speed humps, traffic circles, and other speed
control measures, volume impacts would be expected to vary with the degree of speed
reduction. Route choice depends on relative travel time, and a route that is traffic
calmed becomes less attractive relative to alternate routes. How traffic calming of one
roadway link affects relative travel time for an entire trip, end-to-end, is impossible to
say without detailed origin-destination data. But there should be some impact on link
volumes.
Examples from Bellevue, Washington, illustrate the above principles. SE 63rd
Street and 162nd Avenue SE were both treated with 12-foot humps. Hump spacing is
comparable, and impacts on speed are nearly the same. But SE 63rd Street (Figure 5) has
no parallel route available to through trafﬁc, and 162nd Ave SE (Figure 6) has a good
alternate route available. Before-and-after studies show an increase in trafﬁc on SE 63rd
Street, and a sizable decrease on 162nd Ave SE (see Table 3).

=== p.8 ===
I-1 / 8
TRB Circular E-C019: Urban Street Symposium
Somerset Drive in Bellevue was initially treated with 12-foot humps of 3-3⁄4 inch
height spaced an average of 150 feet apart. Speed reduction and annoyance were about as
great as they get with speed humps. After many complaints from residents, the humps
were reinstalled at a height of 3 inches and average spacing of 340 feet. When ﬁrst treated,
Somerset Drive saw its daily trafﬁc volumes drop by a third, with signiﬁcant diversion to
parallel local streets. When the number and height of humps were reduced, daily volumes
nearly returned to their pretreatment levels (see Table 4).
Modeling Volume Impacts
Given origin-destination data for trips on the local street network, and given estimates
of link speeds after treatment, it should be possible to predict the volume impacts of
traffic calming measures using a traffic assignment program that seeks the path with
the minimum travel time for each trip. The fact that this has never been done (as far as
can be determined) hints at the difficulty of doing so.
FIGURE 5
SE 63rd Street with no
parallel route (Bellevue, Washington).
FIGURE 6
162nd Avenue
SE with a parallel route
(Bellevue, Washington).

=== p.9 ===
Ewing
I-1 / 9
Short of developing or testing traffic assignment software, the most that could
be accomplished in this study was to estimate simple statistical models using before-
and-after data. A modeling technique known as multiple classification analysis (MCA)
was used. MCA is related to analysis of variance, post-processing the latter’s results.
It is akin to (though much tidier than) multiple regression analysis using dummy
variables.
Different models were estimated for volume and speed control measures, in keeping
with the different concepts advanced in the previous subsection, “Determinants of Trafﬁc
Volumes.” In both models, the dependent variable was the percentage reduction in trafﬁc
volume and the independent variable was the type of trafﬁc calming measure. For volume
control measures, a covariate was tested, that being how far (in blocks) from the measure
that trafﬁc counts were taken. For speed control measures, the covariate was the percentage
reduction in speed achieved with a particular measure.
MCA results for volume control measures are presented in Table 5. Volume controls
categorically reduce trafﬁc volumes by about 39 percent. This ﬁgure applies to the entire
sample, disregarding the type of measure or number of blocks away counts were taken. As
expected, full closures cause the greatest reduction in traffic volumes. Full closures
categorically reduce trafﬁc volumes by an additional 5 percent beyond the grand mean. Half
closures reduce trafﬁc volumes by an additional 3 percent beyond the grand mean, while
other volume controls have less impact on volumes than the grand mean. Each additional
block from a trafﬁc calming measure lessens the impact on trafﬁc volumes by 5 percent.
Given the tremendous variation in impacts from application to application, none
of the impacts just cited are statistically signiﬁcant. The differences among measures,
while apparently large, are not large enough to be signiﬁcant at the .05 probability level.
TABLE 3
Comparable Treatments with Different Results 
(SE 63rd St. and 162nd Ave., SE—Bellevue, Washington)
Measures
Speed Change
Volume Change
SE 63rd Street
12' humps spaced
500' apart (average)
36 ≥ 25 mph
2,456 ≥ 2,593 vpd
162nd Avenue SE
12' humps spaced
580' apart (average)
37 ≥ 27 mph
1,472 ≥ 1,071 vpd
TABLE 4
Volume Changes in Response to Treatments 
(Somerset Drive—Bellevue, Washington)

=== p.10 ===
I-1 / 10
TRB Circular E-C019: Urban Street Symposium
MCA results for speed control measures are presented in Table 6. Speed control
measures categorically reduce trafﬁc volumes by 15 percent. This ﬁgure applies to the entire
sample, disregarding the type of measure and its impact on speed. The percent of reduction
in trafﬁc volume is weakly related to the percent of reduction in speed. The value of the
coefﬁcient, 0.2, implies that trafﬁc volumes are inelastic with respect to trafﬁc speeds. All
else being equal, a 10 percent drop in speed will cause a 2 percent drop in volume.
The type of measure employed is significant, beyond whatever effect it may
have on operating speed. Humps categorically reduce traffic volumes by an additional
5 percent beyond the grand mean. This is presumably due to the rocking motion they
produce at low speeds and jarring impact they have at high speeds. Speed tables and
circles, which produce less discomfort, have less effect on traffic volumes.
IMPACTS ON COLLISIONS
Perhaps the most politically consequential impacts of trafﬁc calming are in the area of
safety. By slowing trafﬁc, eliminating conﬂicting movements, and/or sharpening drivers’
attention, trafﬁc calming may result in fewer collisions. Due to lower speeds, collisions
may be less serious when they occur. What makes safety impacts so politically
consequential is the fact that opposition to trafﬁc calming is based principally on safety
concerns, concerns related to emergency response.
Seattle’s success in implementing traffic calming measures, over many years
with less controversy than elsewhere, may be due to its public emphasis on traffic
safety. It is hard to go head-to-head with the fire chief when he is threatening delayed
TABLE 5
Volume Impact Models: Volume Control Measures

=== p.11 ===
Ewing
I-1 / 11
response to fires and medical emergencies and you, the engineer or planner, can only
offer a nicer street environment. It is easier when you can argue one safety impact
versus another.
Faced with budget cuts in 1996, the Seattle Transportation Division resumed its
accident analyses and reiterated safety as a departmental priority. Savings in property and
casualty losses were estimated to be in the millions of dollars each year (see Table 7).
The trafﬁc calming program was spared the budget ax.
Outside the United States
Recently, the Insurance Corporation of British Columbia published a report entitled
Safety Beneﬁts of Trafﬁc Calming (2), in which 43 international case studies are
summarized. Among the 43, collision frequencies declined by anywhere from 8 to 100
percent. Apparently in no case did collisions increase with trafﬁc calming.
Trafﬁc circles and chicanes had the most favorable impacts on safety, reducing
collision frequency by an average of 82 percent (see Figure 7). It is easy to see why
circles might have this effect. They are located at intersections, where a disproportionate
number of trafﬁc collisions occur. Circles not only slow trafﬁc on the approaches but
reduce the number of potential conﬂict points within the intersection from 21 to just 8.
It is harder to understand why chicanes would have such a favorable impact on
safety. Perhaps it is due to the heightened attention to driving that accompanies the
relatively complex maneuver of negotiating an s-curve. It was not clear from the
Insurance Corporation’s report whether the chicanes studied were one- or two-lane slow
TABLE 6
Volume Impact Model—Speed Control Measures

=== p.12 ===
I-1 / 12
TRB Circular E-C019: Urban Street Symposium
points. If one-lane slow points, driver attention would be further heightened by the
narrow paved width and the potential for conﬂict with opposing trafﬁc.
In the international survey, humps were almost as effective as circles and
chicanes, achieving an average collision reduction of 75 percent. This is counterintuitive.
While humps slow trafﬁc, they also create wide variations in speed within the trafﬁc
stream. Some vehicles slow down more than others, or slow down sooner than others, etc.
Variation in speed, as much as speed itself, is a cause of collisions. For safety impacts of
other measures, including some that fall outside the SOA report’s deﬁnition of trafﬁc
calming, see Figure 7. Note that physical measures outperform regulatory measures in
this international survey.
Within the United States
Before-and-after studies of collisions in featured communities are summarized in the
SOA report. Results are less favorable than the international experience would suggest.
In most cases the number of collisions went down or stayed the same, but exceptions
appear frequently.
TABLE 7
Cost Savings Due to Accident Reduction (Seattle, Washington)
FIGURE 7
Average reduction 
in collisions by measure.

=== p.13 ===
Ewing
I-1 / 13
The problem is, in part, a statistical one. Trafﬁc calming in the United States is
largely restricted to low-volume residential streets. Collisions occur infrequently on such
streets to begin with, and any systematic change in collision rates tends to get lost in the
random variation from year to year. This limits our conﬁdence in drawing inferences
about safety impacts of trafﬁc calming.
A difference-of-means test for paired samples was used to check for signiﬁcant
changes in collision frequencies after trafﬁc calming (see Table 8). The test was applied
to the entire sample and to subsamples of different trafﬁc calming measures. The test
was also applied to the subsample of measures for which before-and-after trafﬁc
volumes are available, adjusting collision frequencies after trafﬁc calming for changes in
trafﬁc volumes and hence changes in exposure. For the sample as a whole, collisions
decline to a very signiﬁcant degree after trafﬁc calming (the difference being statistically
signiﬁcant at the .001 probability level). Adjusting for changes in trafﬁc volumes, and
dropping cases for which volume data are not available, collisions decline to a less
signiﬁcant degree (but still statistically signiﬁcant at the conventional .05 level). This
drop in statistical signiﬁcance has as much to do with the exclusion of Seattle circles
(with their amazing safety record) as with the adjustment for lower trafﬁc volumes after
trafﬁc calming.
As for individual trafﬁc calming measures, all reduce the average number of
collisions on treated streets, but only 22-foot tables and trafﬁc circles produce differences
that are statistically signiﬁcant. Including Seattle data, circles are by far the best performers.
It is curious that safety impacts of trafﬁc calming would be less favorable in the U.S. than
elsewhere. Is it a function of roadway geometrics, driving habits, building setbacks, trafﬁc
volumes, or something else? One possible explanation is that European and British trafﬁc
calming treatments are more intensive and more integrated with their surroundings than
U.S. treatments. Three illustrated volumes—one continental European, one British, and one
a mix—clearly demonstrate this point (3–5). Hardly a treatment pictured or described has
only one type of measure in place; most make use of two or three at a single slow point to
calm trafﬁc intensively. Reported speeds drop on average by almost 11 mph or 30 percent
in the British sample, compared to under 7 mph or 20 percent for U.S. studies collected for
the SOA report.
TABLE 8
Safety Impacts of Trafﬁc Calming Measures
Number of
Observations
Average Number
of Collisions
Before/After
Treatment
% Change in
Collisions
Before≥After
Treatment
t-statistic (significance
level—two-tailed test)
12' Humps
49
2.7/2.4
-11%
-0.8 (.41)
14' Humps
5
4.4/2.6
-41%
-1.6 (.18)
22' Tables
8
6.7/3.7
-45%
-4.1 (.005)
Circles
Without Seattle
 With Seattle
17
130
5.9/4.2
2.2/.6
-29%
-73%
-2.2 (.04)
-10.8 (.001)
All Measures
 Without adjustments
 With adjustments
192
42
2.6/1.3
3.8/3.0
-50%
-21%
-8.6 (.001)
-2.3 (.04)

=== p.14 ===
I-1 / 14
TRB Circular E-C019: Urban Street Symposium
It is also curious that Seattle’s experience with trafﬁc circles is so much more
favorable than elsewhere. One reason may be that Seattle selects trafﬁc calming projects
largely on the basis of collision frequency, which could bias results in a statistical sense.
Another reason may be that Seattle is trafﬁc calming low-volume residential streets that
have a safety problem only because of Seattle’s extensive street grid. Elsewhere, circles
tend to be used at higher volume intersections that carry more through trafﬁc. A third
reason may be that Seattle data relate speciﬁcally to intersections, while other places
sometimes report collisions for roadway segments including the intersections. The effect
of the circles would be diluted in the latter case.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Financial support for this research was provided by the Federal Highway Administration,
U.S. Department of Transportation.
REFERENCES
1. Ewing, R. Trafﬁc Calming State-of-the-Art. Institute of Transportation Engineers,
Washington, D.C., pending.
2. Geddes, E., et al., Safety Beneﬁts of Trafﬁc Calming. Insurance Corporation of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, 1996.
3. Herrstedt, L., et al. An Improved Trafﬁc Environment—A Catalogue of Ideas. Danish
Road Directorate, Copenhagen, Denmark, 1993.
4. County Surveyors Society. Trafﬁc Calming in Practice. Landor Publishing, London,
1994.
5. Hass-Klau, C., et al. Civilized Streets: A Guide to Trafﬁc Calming. Environmental and
Transport Planning, Brighton, England, 1992.
