=== p.1 ===
116  •  Traffic Calming: State of the Practice
Noise Levels
Residents are often concerned that vertical measures—
humps, tables, and especially, textured surfaces—will raise
noise levels in their neighborhoods. However, experience
in the surveyed communities indicates the lower speeds
that result from proper design and application of traffic
calming measures tend to lower noise levels. The one ex-
ception is just downstream of the measures themselves,
particularly when cargo-carrying trucks make up a sig-
nificant fraction of the traffic stream.
Charlotte, NC, took noise readings before and after
installation of speed humps in three neighborhoods. Noise
levels did not change in two, and showed a slight decrease
in the third. San Jose found that average noise levels fell
from 77 to 75 A-rated decibels (dBA) after speed humps
were installed.
Boulder, CO, conducted what may be the most thor-
ough evaluation of noise impacts to date, at least in the
United States (see table 5.10). Traffic circles were percep-
tibly less noisy than untreated streets. Raised crossings also
produced lower and more uniform noise levels than did
untreated streets.
Interestingly, since STOP signs are viewed as a panacea
for traffic problems by many citizens and elected officials,
this option may be the worst from a noise standpoint.
Although deceleration is relatively quiet, acceleration from
rest or near rest is not. Noise levels rise until drivers shift
gears, and then rise again until they shift again.
The Europeans, who have studied noise impacts of traf-
fic calming measures far more thoroughly than have com-
munities in the United States, have reached similar con-
clusions. The more speeds are reduced, the more noise
levels are reduced. Simple mathematical relationships have
been estimated. Noise impacts are less favorable where
commercial traffic is heavy and where slow points are so
far apart that traffic fully accelerates between them.16
What is not captured by noise studies is the occasional
screeching of tires, clunking of cargo, or in a few commu-
nities, honking in protest when vertical measures are first
installed. This is one advantage of horizontal measures,
and one argument for raised intersections over midblock
humps or tables. At least the raised intersections are not
directly in front of people’s houses.
Future Research
No information on other impacts of traffic calming—for
example, impact on people with disabilities, air quality, or
social interactions among neighbors—was uncovered in
this review of U.S. practice. Europeans have assessed some
of these other impacts in their formal evaluations. These
impacts are related to quality of life and should be candi-
dates for future research in the United States.
Impacts of Education and Enforcement
This section reviews the limited evidence available on
the effectiveness of education and enforcement activities
(see appendix D for individual study results). The evi-
dence is not encouraging. Yet, these activities cannot be
dismissed. There have been successes, and enforcement
activities in the communities surveyed seem particularly
successful on high-volume collectors and arterials, the
streets that are least amenable to restrictive engineering
measures.
Neighborhood Traffic Safety Campaigns
Neighborhood traffic safety campaigns usually consist of
personalized letters or general flyers that are distributed
to all residents of a neighborhood and that cite statistics
on speeding within the neighborhood and appeal for
compliance with traffic laws (see figure 5.38). No em-
pirical evidence was uncovered regarding the impacts of
such campaigns. Among traffic managers, there is skepti-
cism about their effectiveness.
Radar Speed Display Units
Radar speed display units are rotated from street to street,
based on citizen requests. Their purpose is to remind driv-
ers that they are speeding, thus encouraging compliance
Source: City of Boulder, “Environmental Enforcement Department Sound Study,”  Attachment F,  Study Session on the Neighborhood
Traffic Mitigation Program, Boulder City Council, April 8, 1997.
Location
Measure
Usual Level (decibels)
Peak Level (decibels)
17th and Balsam
None
68–69
72
13th and Balsam
4-way stop
66–67
69
14th and Balsam
Traffic circle
60–64
70
Nicholl and Edgewood
Raised crossing
60–62
64
(extension of Balsam)
Table 5.10. Traffic Noise Levels Near an Uncontrolled Intersection,  4-Way Stop, Traffic Circle, and Raised Intersection. (Boulder, CO)

=== p.2 ===
Chapter 5: Traffic Calming Impacts  •  117
Figure 5.38. Example of a Neighborhood Safety Flyer. (Kirkland, WA)
with the speed limit. The most common form of radar
speed display unit is a portable trailer equipped with a
radar unit that detects the speed of passing vehicles and
displays it on a reader board, often with a speed limit sign
next to the display (see figure 5.39).
San Jose has found radar speed trailers effective only
while displayed. The residual effect is negligible. Kirkland,
WA, reports that radar speed trailers, while displayed, re-
duce speed by 25 percent.17 In the longer term (30 days
after a series of applications), speeds are reduced by 6
percent on streets with traffic volumes below 600 ve-
hicles per day; on such streets, most traffic is local, and
radar speed trailers raise residents’ consciousness. On
higher volume streets serving through traffic, the long-
term effect of radar speed trailers has been found to be
negligible.
Neighborhood Speed Watch
In some communities, speed watch programs lend resi-
dents radar guns and have them record the speeds, makes,
models, and license plate numbers of all vehicles clocked
speeding through their neighborhood. The police depart-
ment then sends warning letters to the owners of offend-
ing vehicles, reminding them of the posted speed limit
and the neighborhood’s concern for safety.
In San Jose, neighborhood speed watch was dropped
for lack of resident interest. There, as elsewhere, the pro-
gram was hampered by resident fear of confrontation with
irate motorists and by a lack of volunteers during hours
when traffic speeding is at its worst.
In Phoenix, neighborhood speed watch programs have
had marginal impacts on 85th percentile speeds. Among
five streets for which measurements are available, the
median speed reduction was only 1 mph; one street actu-
ally experienced an increase in the 85th percentile speed
(see appendix D). The traffic management team in Phoe-
nix refers to neighborhood speed watch as their “resident
calming” program, since residents seem to feel better af-
ter the experience despite lack of manifest results.
In Kirkland, WA, neighborhood speed watch proved
even less effective than the radar speed trailer. Thirty days
after speed monitoring, 85th percentile speeds were un-
changed at two locations and had fallen by 2 mph at a
third. At the third location, the drop in speed may have
been due to intensive police enforcement rather than speed
watch.18
The one reported exception to generally unimpres-
sive results is Gwinnett County’s speed watch program in
which 85th percentile speeds fell from 45 to 35 mph.19
Gwinnett County’s program, now defunct, was different
from others in several respects. Transportation department
personnel performed the radar speed checks, avoiding the
problems of resident reluctance and unreliability. Offend-
ing residents were personally visited by neighborhood
committee members who appealed for cooperation.
Names of offenders were published in a neighborhood
newsletter, and in at least a few cases, membership in a
subdivision swim and tennis club was suspended over
speeding violations. The labor intensiveness of the pro-
Figure 5.39. Radar Speed Trailer in the Field.
(Kirkland, WA)
Photo Credit: Tony Mazzella

=== p.3 ===
118  •  Traffic Calming: State of the Practice
gram, not its effectiveness, was its downfall. It fell victim
to budget cuts.
Targeted Police Enforcement
Communities cannot place a police officer on every cor-
ner. In an extensive network of local streets, there are too
few officers, too many corners, and too many hours in
the day when speeding can occur. Limited personnel can
be more cost-effectively deployed on main thoroughfares.
The best that can be offered to those living on low-
volume streets is periodic daytime speed enforcement.
Boulder tried targeted speed enforcement on streets that
had applied for traffic calming measures but were ineli-
gible, having been designated critical emergency response
routes. In all, 38 high-enforcement zones (HEZs) were
established on 30 individual streets. Results were disap-
pointing. After enforcement, speeds were unchanged in
three HEZs for which before-and-after data are available,
and speeds actually went up in the fourth (see appendix D).
Photo-Radar Speed Enforcement
Where authorized by State law, photo-radar is a new speed
enforcement option. Photo-radar uses a radar unit to
measure the speed of passing vehicles and a camera to
take a photograph of any vehicle exceeding the speed limit
(see figure 5.40). The photograph usually captures the
Measure
Initial Cost
Annual Cost
Annual Revenues
Photo-radar (ownership option)
$85,000
$145,000
$40,000
Photo-radar (lease option)
0
$214,000
$40,000
Targeted police enforcement
$70,000
$194,000
$40,000
Speed humps
$300,000
$30,000
$0
Table 5.11. Cost Comparison—Photo-Radar, Police Enforcement, and Humps. (San Jose, CA)
Figure 5.40. Photo-Radar Warning Sign Combined with a Choker.
(San Jose, CA)
Source: City of San Jose, “Final Report on the Neighborhood Automated Speed Compliance Program,” Report to Mayor and Council,
December 12, 1997.
image of a speeding vehicle with sufficient clarity to read
the license plate. The owner of the vehicle is then sent a
citation which he or she can either pay or contest. Some
states require that citations be issued to drivers and treated
as moving violations, with points assessed against drivers’
licenses. In such cases, more elaborate camera equipment
is required to capture the image of the driver’s face.
Photo-radar units can be portable, so they can be moved
around from day to day or even hour to hour. In the com-
munities surveyed, each unit is staffed full-time. The staff
member drives the unit from place to place, sets it up, and
protects it against vandalism. Typically contracted out as a
turnkey operation, a photo-radar unit typically costs about
$4,000 per month for lease of equipment, $3,000 for pro-
gram operation, and $20 per citation issued. On top of
these costs is the salary of full-time staff assigned to each
unit. Photo-radar emerges as a relatively expensive
option, though certainly no more so than targeted speed
enforcement using commissioned police officers (see
table 5.11).
During its trial period, San Jose rotated one photo-
radar unit among 20 local streets, resulting in relatively
low levels of enforcement. Peak-hour speeds fell on 13 of
20 streets and rose slightly on 5 (see appendix D). Speed-
ing continued to be a problem on evenings and week-
ends. On the positive side, speed reductions seemed to
hold up over time without enforcement, and may have
spilled over to nearby streets that were not treated (which
is not true of engineering measures). Also, public reaction
was positive because only speeders were penalized (which,
again, is not true of some engineering measures).
Because it is relatively expensive to operate, photo-
radar is most cost-effectively deployed on high-volume
streets with speeding and collision problems. These are
the streets least amenable to the use of physical measures
to slow traffic. So photo-radar may be very complemen-
tary to physical measures as part of a comprehensive traf-
fic management program.

=== p.4 ===
Chapter 5: Traffic Calming Impacts  •  119
Impacts of Regulatory Measures
Regulatory measures are generally perceived as less effec-
tive at calming traffic than are physical measures that by
their nature are self-enforcing. Typical of attitudes among
featured communities is this one from San Jose:
The exclusive use of passive devices (signs and mark-
ings) has been proposed in lieu of the combination
of both passive and active devices (physical diverters)
that were used in Naglee Park. Observation of mo-
torist behavior by city staff during the project pe-
riod has confirmed our belief that fewer motorists
would be discouraged without the physical
diverters.20
Yet, like education and enforcement programs, all regu-
latory measures are not equally effective, and all experi-
ences with regulatory measures are not alike (see appen-
dix E). Regulatory measures certainly have a role in neigh-
borhood traffic management, either as a precursor to the
use of physical measures or as a complement.
STOP Signs
The use of STOP signs at low-volume intersections strictly
for traffic calming purposes is controversial. The Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways
(MUTCD) states explicitly, “...STOP signs should not be
used for speed control.”21 The majority of communities
surveyed observe this recommendation and follow related
STOP sign warrants. The communities reason that driv-
ers will run unwarranted STOP signs or speed to make
up for lost time. A minority of engineers break with the
MUTCD.22 They view the MUTCD’s warrants as too strin-
gent for residential streets, and view STOP signs as a low-
cost alternative to slow or divert traffic.
Most published studies of STOP signs show little or
no midblock speed reduction and many more rolling than
complete stops.23 At the same time, cut-through traffic
appears to be discouraged by STOP signs, and collisions
may be less frequent and severe.24 And, while their impact
on speed is limited to the immediate vicinity of intersec-
tions, in this respect they differ only in degree from any
traffic calming measure, all of which have limited areas of
influence (for example, see figure 5.41).
A few featured communities have experience with un-
warranted STOP signs, and this experience supplements
the published literature. Unwarranted STOP signs are an
integral part of neighborhood traffic management pro-
grams in at least two communities and have been tested
in several others.
In one application, Seattle found that midblock speeds
actually increased with unwarranted STOP signs. More
typically, midblock speeds decrease but remain well above
posted speed limits. Traffic calming effects were found to
be very localized, extending no farther than 150 to 200
feet downstream of intersections and even shorter dis-
tances upstream.25
Figure 5.41. Areas of Influence—STOP Signs versus Traffic Circles.
Source: W. Marconi,  “Speed Control Measures in Residential Areas,” Traffic Engineering, Vol. 47,
March 1977, pp. 28-30.

=== p.5 ===
120  •  Traffic Calming: State of the Practice
STOP Signs
Speed
Accidents
Compliance
Warranted
reduced 2–10 mph
decrease
good
Unwarranted
reduced 2–10 mph
increase
poor
Table 5.12. Performance of All-Way Stops. (Portland, OR)
Source: Department of Transportation, “Brentford Lane—Stop Sign Compliance
Study,” Gwinnett County, GA, September 1997.
Source: Citizens Advisory Committee, Evaluation of the Neighborhood Traffic Management Program (NTMP) for Local Service Streets—
Report and Recommendations, City of Portland, OR, March 1992, p. B-4.
Figure 5.42. Compliance with All-Way Stops. (Gwinnett County, GA)
Full compliance with stop control is rare, but so is com-
plete disregard. In nearly every evaluation, a majority of
drivers roll slowly through unwarranted STOP signs (see
figure 5.42).
Portland’s assessment of all-way stops appears balanced
(see table 5.12). Except for the reported increase in colli-
sions at unwarranted STOP signs, it is consistent with
most other research. Portland concluded that while un-
warranted STOP signs may reduce speeds somewhat, the
negative tradeoffs involved make the use of unwarranted
STOP signs unwise. Even Dayton, the featured commu-
nity relying most heavily on unwarranted STOP signs,
has made it procedurally more difficult for neighborhoods
to qualify, and has taken the extraordinary step of install-
ing speed bumps or “jiggle bumps” at intersections to
compel compliance (see figure 5.43).
Turn Restrictions
Among featured communities, Phoenix and San Jose have
made turn restrictions an integral part of their neighbor-
hood traffic management programs. The last of the
areawide plans in San Jose—for the Dry Creek Road
neighborhood—relied exclusively on turn restrictions and
all-way stops. Violation rates for the turn restrictions hov-
ered around 50 percent without enforcement, but were
reduced to 20 percent with active enforcement. After ac-
tive enforcement ended, violation rates rose again but not
to their initial levels.
Turn restrictions are popular with neighborhoods in
Phoenix, being one of the few measures that cost neigh-
borhoods nothing (see chapter 8). Despite violations, peak-
hour turn restrictions in Phoenix cut peak-hour volumes
on some neighborhood streets by about half, on average
(see figure 5.44).
Turn restrictions appear most effective when limited
to peak hours. When applied around the clock, turn re-
strictions are less effective (for an example, compare re-
sults for 37th Street in Phoenix to other streets with turn
restrictions shown in appendix E). Communities want-
ing around-the-clock volume reductions would be bet-
ter served by half closures.
One-Way Streets
One-way streets can be used to restrict through traffic,
either in isolated applications or in combinations that cre-
ate maze-like routes through a neighborhood. Historic

=== p.6 ===
Chapter 5: Traffic Calming Impacts  •  121
cities such as St. Augustine, FL, which need the street ca-
pacity to handle tourist traffic but wish to avoid speeding
or cut-through problems, combine one-way streets in ways
that force turns every block or two (see figure 5.45).
This use of one-way streets is entirely different from
the pairing of one-way streets for purposes of improving
traffic flow. The latter practice, common in the 1950’s and
now being undone in some locales as part of downtown
Figure 5.43. Intersection Jiggle Bump. (Dayton, OH)
Figure 5.44. Effective Peak-Hour Turn Restriction Despite
Violators. (Phoenix, AZ)
Figure 5.45. Restrictive Use of One-Way Streets in a Historic City.
(St. Augustine, FL)
revitalization programs, may increase traffic speeds. The
return to two-way operation in such settings is a traffic
calming measure discussed in chapter 9.
Several featured communities have tried restrictive one-
way streets (see figure 5.46). Yet because of inconvenience
to residents, enforcement concerns, and speeding prob-
lems that cannot be solved with one-way streets, most
communities have made limited use of this option. Three
communities—Gwinnett County, Phoenix, and Seattle—
recommend that half closures be used instead of, or in
addition to, restrictive one-way streets to reduce viola-
tion rates.
No before-and-after data are available from which to
judge the effectiveness of restrictive one-way streets.
“Rest on Red” and “Rest on Green”
Boulder is testing “rest on red,” where all approaches to
an intersection face red lights. If advance loops detect an
approaching vehicle moving at or below the desired speed,
and no other vehicle is being served at the cross street,
the signal turns green. If speeding is detected, the green
phase is not triggered until the vehicle comes to rest at
the stop line.
Boulder will also be testing “rest on green” signal op-
eration, where approaches along a main street will get a
green light as long as traffic is moving at or below the
desired speed and no one is waiting on the side street. Signals
will switch to red if speeding is detected, thus punishing or
rewarding based on compliance with speed limits.
No performance data are available as yet for “rest on
green” or “rest on red.”
Impacts of Psycho-Perception Controls
A predecessor to this report, a state-of-the-art report pro-
duced for FHWA circa 1980, describes psycho-percep-
tion controls in these terms:
Figure 5.46. Short One-Way Section to Discourage Traffic Through a
Neighborhood. (Minneapolis, MN)

=== p.7 ===
122  •  Traffic Calming: State of the Practice
Another approach to the problem [of speeding] is
to try to play upon ingrained driver responses to
certain stimuli to induce or even trick them into a
desired behavior pattern or to use materials and
messages which heighten driver response.26
The psycho-perception controls listed in the FHWA
report included transverse lines with increasingly close
spacing, odd speed limit signs, unique message signs, and
speed-actuated flashing warning signs. None were reported
to have had much success in local street applications.
This report adds several cases to the earlier performance
database (see appendix F).
Centerline and Edgeline Striping
Painting an edgeline several feet from the pavement edge
has the effect of visually narrowing the roadway. A double
yellow line striped down the center of roadway might
have a comparable effect, visually limiting drivers to half
of the road. In theory, the perceived narrowing could cause
a modest speed reduction, just as a real narrowing causes
a modest speed reduction.
The theory is not borne out by empirical studies.
Results from Howard County, MD, Beaverton, OR, and
San Antonio, TX, suggest that vehicle operating speeds are as
likely to increase as decrease with striping. One explanation
is that centerlines and edgelines define the vehicle travel
path more clearly, creating a gun barrel effect.
Results from the aforementioned studies could be dis-
missed because even with the narrowings, pavement and
lane widths remained substantial. Yet, results from Orlando,
FL, where travel lanes were taken down to 9 feet, showed
speeds to be unaffected (see figure 5.47).27 This psycho-
perception control was not “tricking” anyone and hence
was removed from both the centerline and edgelines.
One reported exception is the North Ida Avenue
project in Portland (see discussion at beginning of this
chapter). Whether this restriping/narrowing proved more
effective because it created bicycle lanes rather than shoul-
ders, or because it was coupled with physical measures, is
an issue for further study.
Transverse Markings
At least one study found that a pattern of transverse mark-
ings at decreasing intervals across the travel path slows
traffic.28 This pattern supposedly creates the illusion of
increasing speed, thus inducing drivers to slow down. If
the study is correct, the effect is substantial (see appendix
F). However, independent verification of this study’s find-
ings could not be found, and it is possible that the novelty
of these markings was a primary cause of the initial effec-
tiveness.
Figure 5.47. Remnant of Visual Narrowing that Proved Ineffective.
(Orlando, FL)
A transverse marking pattern is part of the standard
22-foot speed table design, developed by Seminole County
(see chapter 3 and figure 5.48). Motorists slow down for
these tables. But it is questionable how much of the re-
ported speed reduction is due to the tables and how much
is due to the markings.
Figure 5.48. Transverse Markings on the Approach to a Speed
Hump. (Seminole County, FL)
Eugene installed a transverse marking pattern on a hori-
zontal curve that had been the site of three run-off-the-
road accidents in the year before treatment (see figure
5.49). There have been no similar accidents since then.
After the treatment, the 85th percentile speed decreased
by 2 mph and the top speed recorded fell by 5 mph. What
is not clear from this study, nor from two earlier studies
documenting the same effect, is whether transverse mark-
ings have a speed reducing effect only if placed on the
approaches to sharp curves or only until the novelty wears
off.29

=== p.8 ===
Chapter 5: Traffic Calming Impacts  •  123
Figure 5.49. Transverse Markings  on a Horizontal Curve. (Eugene, OR)
Figure 5.50. Examples of Semi-Enclosed Street Spaces.
Small Setbacks
Trees or buildings at the street edge create a sense of en-
closure. A tenet of urban design is that visual enclosure is
required to transform streets into pedestrian places (see
figure 5.50).
The same qualities that make enclosed street spaces
comfortable for pedestrians may make them uncomfort-
able for speeding motorists. A 1980 FHWA study30 corre-
lated vehicle operating speeds with pavement width, with
pavement width plus building setbacks (distance from
building face to building face), and with several other vari-
ables (see figure 5.51). The strongest correlation was with
pavement width plus building setbacks, indicating the
importance of setbacks.
Street trees may or may not have the same effect as
buildings near the street. A tree canopy by itself may not
signal human presence in the same way as do doors and
windows at the street edge. One featured community,
Tallahassee, FL, has signed streets with tree canopies for
slower speeds, but has no data on the effect of the cano-
pies (see figure 5.52). Another, Portland, has data for a
single street that is otherwise comparable along its length
except for tree cover (see figure 5.53). The segments of
NE 15th Avenue from Broadway to Knott and from Knott
to Fremont have a mature tree canopy. The segment from
Fremont to Prescott does not. The street showed no varia-
tion in speed along its length before or after speed tables
were installed.

=== p.9 ===
124  •  Traffic Calming: State of the Practice
Figure 5.53. Variation in Speed Along Street with and without Canopy.
(Portland, OR)
Figure 5.52. Canopied Street Signed for Slower Speeds. (Tallahassee, FL)
Source: Bureau of Traffic Management, City of Portland.
Figure 5.51. Speed versus Pavement Width and Pavement Width Plus Setbacks.
Endnotes
1. A recent study suggests that the proportion of
through traffic is a more important determinant of
running speed than previously realized, even more
important, for example, than street width. See J.L.
Gattis and A. Watts, “Urban Street Speed Related to
Width and Functional Class,” Journal of Transporta-
tion Engineering, Vol. 125, No. 3, pp. 193–200, May-
June 1999.
2. The most similar application we came across was
the use of NETSIM, a widely accepted traffic simu-
lation program, to analyze the impacts of a street
closure in San Diego. NETSIM does not assign traffic
to the network; it only analyzes traffic operations
given assigned volumes. The program can be of as-
sistance in predicting speeds posttreatment, but not
traffic volumes.
3. For more on MCA and its advantages, see the pio-
neering application of MCA to trip generation by
Stopher and McDonald. P.R. Stopher and K.G.
McDonald, “Trip Generation by Cross-Classifica-
tion: An Alternative Methodology,” Transportation Re-
search Record 944, 1983, pp. 84–91. Also see F.M.
Andrew et al., Multiple Classification Analysis—A
Report on a Computer Program for Multiple Regression
Using Categorical Predictors, Institute for Social Re-
search, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 1973.
4. E. Geddes et al., Safety Benefits of Traffic Calming, In-
surance Corporation of British Columbia, Vancouver,
BC, Canada, 1996.
5. M. Jenks, “Residential Roads Researched: Are In-
novative Estates Safer?” Architects’ Journal, Vol. 177,
June 1983, pp. 46–49; Transport and Road Research
Laboratory (TRRL), Urban Safety Project—Interim
Results for Area-Wide Schemes, Digest of Research
Report 154, London, England, 1988 (plus other re-
ports in the same series); various chapters in R. Tolley,
Calming Traffic in Residential Areas, Brefi Press, Brefi,
England, 1990; H.H. Topp, “Traffic Safety, Usability,
and Streetscape Effects of New Design Principles
for Major Urban Roads,” Transportation, Vol. 16, 1990,
pp. 297–310; S.T. Janssen, “Road Safety in Urban
Districts—Final Results of Accident Studies in the
Dutch Demonstration Projects of the 1970s,” Traffic
Engineering + Control, 1991, pp. 292–296; S.J.
Thompson and S. Heydon, “Improving Pedestrian
Conspicuity by the Use of a Promontory,” Traffic
Engineering + Control, Vol. 32, 1991, 370–371; S.D.
Challis, “North Earlham Estate, Worwich: The First
UK 20 mph Zone,” in Traffic Management and Road
Safety, PTRC Education and Research Services Ltd.,
London, England, 1992, pp. 61–72; C. Hass-Klau et
al., Civilised Streets—A Guide to Traffic Calming, En-
vironment & Transport Planning, Brighton, England,
1992, pp. 71–72; R. Schnull and J. Lange, “Speed
Source: D.T. Smith and D. Appleyard, Improving the Residential Street Envi-
ronment—Final Report, Federal Highway Administration, Washington, DC,
1981, p. 127.

=== p.10 ===
Chapter 5: Traffic Calming Impacts  •  125
Reduction on Through Roads in Nordrhein-Westfalen,”
Accident Analysis & Prevention, Vol. 24, 1992, pp. 67–74;W.
Brilon and H. Blanke, “Extensive Traffic Calming: Results
of the Accident Analyses in Six Model Towns,” in 1993
Compendium of Technical Papers, Institute of Transportation
Engineers, Washington, DC, 1993, pp. 119–123; various case
studies in L. Herrstedt et al., An Improved Traffic Environ-
ment—A Catalogue of Ideas, Danish Road Directorate,
Copenhagen, Denmark, 1993; various case studies in
County Surveyors Society, Traffic Calming in Practice, Landor
Publishing, London, England, 1994; P. Hidas, K. Weerasekera,
and M. Dunne, “Negative Effects of Mid-Block Speed Con-
trol Devices and Their Importance in the Overall Impact
of Traffic Calming on the Environment,” Transportation
Research D, Vol. 3D, 1998, pp. 41–50; and L. Leden, P. Garder,
and U. Pulkkinen, “Measuring the Safety Effect of Raised
Bicycle Crossings Using a New Research Methodology,”
paper presented at the 77th Annual Meeting, Transporta-
tion Research Board, Washington, DC, 1998.
6. Engel and Thompson, “Safety Effects of Speed Reducing
Measures,” Accident Analysis & Prevention, Vol. 24, No. 1, 1992.
7. Hass-Klau et al., op. cit.; Herrstedt et al., op. cit.; County
Surveyors Society, Traffic Calming in Practice, Landor Pub-
lishing, London, England, 1994.
8. The two perspectives are depicted, and the evidence is re-
viewed, in S.W. Greenberg and W.M. Rohe, “Neighbor-
hood Design and Crime—A Test of Two Perspectives,” Jour-
nal of the American Planning Association, Vol. 50, 1984, pp.
48–61; and B. Hillier, “Against Enclosure,” in N. Teymur,
T.A. Markus, and T. Woolley (eds.), Rehumanizing Housing,
Butterworths, London, 1988, pp. 63–88.
9. R. Szymanski, Can Changing Neighborhood Traffic Circula-
tion Patterns Reduce Crime and Improve Personal Safety? A
Quantitative Analysis of One Neighborhood’s Efforts, Master’s
Thesis, Florida International University, Ft. Lauderdale, FL,
1994.
10. Advance Planning Division, “An Evaluation of the Speed
Hump Program in the City of Berkeley,” Berkeley, CA,
October 1997, draft, p. 33.
11. Unpublished study conducted by Aileen Ramirez and other
students in Research Methods for Planners, Florida Inter-
national University, Miami, FL, 1998.
12. M. Fager, “Environmental Traffic Management in
Stockholm,” ITE Journal, Vol. 54, July 1984, pp. 16–19; J.H.
Kraay, “Woonerven and Other Experiments in the Neth-
erlands,” Built Environment, Vol. 12, 1986, pp. 20–29; W.B.
Hagan and S.E. Amamoo, “Residential Street Management
in South Australia,” ITE Journal, Vol. 58, March 1988, pp.
35–41; W.S. Homburger et al., Residential Street Design and
Traffic Control, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989,
pp. 79–112; B. Eubanks-Ahrens, “A Closer Look at the
Users of Woonerven,” in A. Vernez Moudon (ed.), Public
Streets for Public Use, Columbia University Press, New York,
NY, 1991, pp. 63–79; S.D. Challis, “North Earlham Estate,
Worwich: The First UK 20 mph Zone,” in Traffic Manage-
ment and Road Safety, PTRC Education and Research Ser-
vices Ltd., London, England, 1992, pp. 61–72; M. Durkin
and T. Pheby, “York: Aiming To Be the UK’s First Traffic
Calmed City,” in Traffic Management and Road Safety, PTRC
Education and Research Services Ltd., London, England,
1992, pp. 73–90; L. Herrstedt, “Traffic Calming Design—
A Speed Management Method—Danish Experience on
Environmentally Adapted Through Roads,” Accident Analysis
& Prevention, Vol. 24, 1992, pp. 3–16; B. Preston, “The Need
for Home Zones,” in Environmental Issues, PTRC Educa-
tion and Research Services Ltd., London, England, 1993,
pp. 215–226; E. Ben-Joseph, “Changing the Residential
Street Scene—Adapting the Shared Street (Woonerf) Con-
cept to the Suburban Environment,” Journal of the American
Planning Association, Vol. 61, 1995, pp. 504–515; and C.L.
Hoyle, Traffic Calming, Planning Advisory Service Report
Number 456, 1995.
13. D.G. Bagby, “The Effects of Traffic Flow on Residential
Property Values,” Journal of the American Planning Associa-
tion, Vol. 46, 1980, pp. 88–94.
14. V. Edwards and W.M. Bretherton, “The Economic Impact
of Speed Humps on Housing Values,” in 68th Annual Meeting
Compendium of Technical Papers (Toronto, ON, Canada, 1998),
Institute of Transportation Engineers, Washington, DC,
1998, CD-ROM.
15. I.M. Lockwood, “Meeting Community Objectives
Through Street Design (The West Palm Beach Approach),”
Harmonizing Transportation & Community Goals (ITE Inter-
national Conference, Monterey, CA, 1998), Institute of
Transportation Engineers, Washington, DC, 1998, CD-
ROM.
16. Hass-Klau et al., op. cit., p. 74; Tolley, op. cit., pp. 48–54;
and P. Abbott, M. Taylor, and R. Layfield, “The Effects of
Traffic Calming Measures on Vehicle and Traffic Noise,”
Traffic Engineering + Control, Vol. 38, 1997, pp. 447–453.
17. T. Mazzella and D. Godfrey, “Building and Testing a Cus-
tomer Responsive Neighborhood Traffic Control Program,”
in 1995 Compendium of Technical Papers, Institute of Transpor-
tation Engineers, Washington, DC, 1995, pp. 75–79.
18. Ibid.
19. J.E. Womble, “Neighborhood Speed Watch: Another
Weapon in the Residential Speed Control Arsenal,” ITE
Journal, Vol. 60, February 1990, pp. 16–17.
20. Department of Traffic Operations, Naglee Park Traffic Plan—
Final Project Report, City of San Jose, CA, 1984, p. 16.
21. Federal Highway Administration, Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways, Washington, DC,
1989, p. 2B-3.
22. G.M. Ebbecke and J.J. Schuster, “Areawide Impact of Traf-
fic Control Devices,” Transportation Research Record 644,
1977, pp. 54–57; H.H. Bissell and L.G. Neudorff, “Criteria
for Removing Traffic Signals,” in 1980 Compendium of Tech-
nical Papers, Institute of Transportation Engineers, Wash-
ington, DC, 1980, pp. 56–66; W.M. Bretherton, “Signal
Warrants—Are They Doing the Job?” in 1991 Compen-

=== p.11 ===
126  •  Traffic Calming: State of the Practice
dium of Technical Papers, Institute of Transportation Engi-
neers, Washington, DC, 1991, pp. 163–167; and J.N. LaPlante
and C.R. Kropidlowski, “Stop Sign Warrants: Time for
Change,” ITE Journal, Vol. 62, 1992, pp. 25–29.
23. See, for example, W. Marconi, “Speed Control Measures in
Residential Areas,” Traffic Engineering, Vol. 47, March 1977,
pp. 28–30; J.M. Mounce, “Driver Compliance with Stop-
Sign Control at Low-Volume Intersections,” Transportation
Research Record 808, 1981, pp. 30-37; D. Meier, “The Policy
Adopted in Arlington County, Virginia, for Solving Real
and Perceived Speeding Problems on Residential Streets,”
in 1985 Compendium of Technical Papers, Institute of Trans-
portation Engineers, Washington, DC, 1985, pp. 97–101;
R.W. Eck and J.A. Biega, “Field Evaluation of Two-Way
Versus Four-Way Stop Sign Control at Low Volume Inter-
sections in Residential Areas,” Transportation Research Record
1160, 1988, pp. 7–13; R.F. Beaubien, “Controlling Speeds
on Residential Streets,” ITE Journal, Vol. 59, April 1989, pp.
37–39; and P.B. Noyes, “Responding to Citizen Requests
for Multiway Stops,” ITE Journal, Vol. 64, January 1994, pp.
43–48.
24. J. Lovell and E. Hauer, “The Safety Effect of Conversion to
All-Way Stop Control,” Transportation Research Record 1068,
1986, pp. 103–107; and B.H. Cottrell, “Using All-Way Stop
Control for Residential Traffic Management,” paper pre-
sented at the 76th Annual Meeting, Transportation Re-
search Board, Washington, DC, 1997.
25. One study suggests a much greater area of impact. It is
atypical. A.J. Ballard, “Efforts to Control Speeds on Resi-
dential Collector Streets,” in 1990 Compendium of Technical
Papers, Institute of Transportation Engineers, Washington,
DC, 1990, pp. 92–95.
26. D.T. Smith and D. Appleyard, State-of-the-Art: Residential
Traffic Management, Federal Highway Administration, Wash-
ington, DC, 1980; and D.T. Smith and D. Appleyard,
Improving the Residential Street Environment—Final Report,
Federal Highway Administration, Washington, DC, 1981,
p. 26.
27. H.S. Lum, “The Use of Road Markings to Narrow Lanes
for Controlling Speed in Residential Areas,” ITE Journal,
Vol. 54, June 1984, pp. 50–53.
28. G.E. Frangos, “Howard County’s Speed Control in Resi-
dential Areas Utilizing Psycho-Perceptive Traffic Controls,”
in 1985 Compendium of Technical Papers, Institute of Trans-
portation Engineers, Washington, DC, 1985, pp. 87–92.
29. Two early studies that reportedly also found transverse
markings to be effective in reducing speeds on curves are
cited by R.A. Retting and C.M. Farmer, “Use of Pave-
ment Markings to Reduce Excessive Traffic Speeds on
Hazardous Curves,” ITE Journal, Vol. 68, September 1998,
pp. 30–34.
30. Smith and Appleyard, 1980, op. cit.
