=== p.1 ===
26
ITE Journal / December 2009
New Traffic Calming Device of Choice
Speed lumps consist of 
two or more raised and 
rounded areas placed 
laterally across a 
roadway with precisely 
spaced gaps allowing 
the wheel tracks of fire-
rescue vehicles to pass 
between the lumps. Speed 
reduction and costs are 
similar to speed humps; 
however, speed lumps do 
not significantly slow 
fire-rescue vehicles. 
Speed lumps have the 
potential to become the 
traffic calming device 
of choice on emergency 
response routes.
By Jeff Gulden, P.E. and Reid Ewing, Ph.D.
Introduction
Speed lumps are a relatively new traffic 
calming device that are almost as inexpen-
sive as speed humps and slow cars as much 
as speed humps but can be designed to 
minimize delay for emergency vehicles and 
discomfort for cyclists. This article discusses 
key aspects of their deployment and de-
scribes their measured effectiveness on both 
passenger cars and fire-rescue vehicles.
In a little more than a decade, traffic 
calming has entered the transportation 
planning and engineering mainstream.1 
Despite growing public support for traffic 
calming, all is not copasetic. States Traffic 
Calming State-of-the-Practice, “Without 
question, a major obstacle to traffic calm-
ing in the United States is opposition from 
fire-rescue services.”2 This concern was 
true in 1999, when Traffic Calming State-
of-the-Practice was written, and is still true 
in cities and counties across the United 
States. At a recent stakeholder meeting in 
La Habra, California, USA, representa-
tives of the Los Angeles County Fire De-
partment expressed opposition to traffic 
calming and stated “…humps slow us to 
a near crawl, delaying a response.” The de-
partment initially refused to take part in a 
demonstration of temporary speed lumps 
(described later), because their participa-
tion might be seen as tacit support.
Their concern is understandable. Traf-
fic calming measures that are effective in 
slowing or diverting automobiles have 
the same effect, or even greater effect, 
on larger fire-rescue vehicles. The biggest 
challenge is to keep the effect on emer-
gency response within 
acceptable bounds, or 
better still, to find 
new ways of slowing and diverting traf-
fic without substantially impeding emer-
gency response.
Not Humps or Bumps
Speed lumps consist of two or more 
raised and rounded areas placed laterally 
across a roadway, with gaps for wheels 
to pass between the lumps. Speed lumps 
should not be mistaken for, or confused 
with, speed bumps or humps, which have 
been commonly used in the United States 
for decades and have uninterrupted raised 
profiles that extend from one edge of the 
street to the other. 
Common speed lump designs are 
shown in Figures 1 and 2. Lumps are 
designed to allow the wheel tracks (the 
distance between the left and right tires) 
of fire vehicles to pass without significant 
jostling or displacement, thereby allowing 
the fire-rescue vehicles to maintain speeds 
similar to those at which they would travel 
on roadways without traffic calming. 
Generally, passenger cars have narrower 
wheel tracks and are displaced vertically 
when passing over lumps.
Compliance by passenger car drivers 
is often reinforced by having wide lumps 
in the travel lanes and a narrow lump 
along the centerline. Fire-rescue vehicles 
cross the centerline to straddle the smaller 
center lump, while very few passenger 
cars are observed to do so. Lumps to the 
outside are wider and function more like 
speed humps for the passenger cars that 
stay in their lanes. Cars may ride with one 
set of wheels in the gap between lumps, 
but the other set of wheels ride up and 
over an outside lump.
Motorists in the United Kingdom were 
driving over speed cushions (the European 
name for speed lumps) by the early 1990s. 
American cities, such as Austin, Texas; 
Alexandria, Virginia; and Mobile, Ala-
bama, followed suit, with evaluation and 
testing in 2000. In September of 2000, 
Sacramento, California, USA, tested a 
set of lumps specifically developed to fit 
the tire base of their fire vehicles. Speed 
lumps were just being introduced to the 
United States at the time Traffic Calming 
State-of-the-Practice was published, and no 
data were available to report; this article 
represents an update to that report. 

=== p.2 ===
ITE Journal / December 2009 
27
Effects on Fire-Rescue Vehicles
Tests were conducted to evaluate the 
effect of speed lumps on delay, comfort 
and ease of navigation for fire vehicles 
(Figure 3). The studies were conducted 
in La Habra, California, USA, and in-
volved Brea, California, USA, and Los 
Angeles County fire department vehicles. 
Each vehicle traversed a set of three speed 
lumps with various geometric designs and 
with different approaches: straddling the 
smaller lump and crossing the lumps while 
staying within the travel lane (similar to a 
speed hump).
Crossing speeds are summarized in Ta-
ble 1. The speeds of fire vehicles straddling 
the smaller, center lump were similar to 
normal operating speeds on the roadways, 
and there was no observed significant de-
lay at the lumps. Crossing the lumps while 
Figure 1. Typical asphalt speed lumps.
Figure 2. Common prefabricated rubber speed lumps.
Figure 3. Testing City of Brea fire engine on speed lumps in La Habra, California.

=== p.3 ===
28
ITE Journal / December 2009
staying in a travel lane (similar to a speed 
hump) resulted in maximum vertical de-
flection and lower crossing speeds. Ac-
cording to the local fire departments, the 
typical travel speed for fire-rescue vehicles 
on residential roadways is the 25 miles per 
hour (mph) speed limit.
The tests were conducted in both di-
rections on the roadway, as a slight grade 
was present. Except on one occasion, most 
speeds traveling downhill while straddling 
the center lump were greater than the 
uphill speeds.
A telephone survey and Internet re-
search uncovered several other tests of 
speed lumps. The following summarizes 
their results:
• In Austin, Texas, USA, speed lumps 
have very minimal, if any, impact on 
emergency response times. Most emer-
gency vehicles experienced less than a 1 
second delay per set of speed lumps.
• Fire vehicles in San Diego, Califor-
nia, USA, can travel in the middle 
of the roadway over the lumps at full 
speed with no delay.
• Speed lumps in Sacramento, Califor-
nia, USA, caused almost no delay to 
emergency response time. Almost 13 
seconds per typical roadway segment 
could be saved by using speed lumps 
instead of humps.
• Fire vehicles in Mobile, Alabama, 
USA, showed 1.76 seconds less delay 
at speed lumps than speed humps. 
Ambulance delay was reduced by 
4.75 seconds when compared to 
speed humps.
• In Danville, California, USA, no delay 
occurred in response time with speed 
lumps, but a 10- to 15-second delay 
was observed with speed humps.
The one exception was in Elk Grove, 
California, where the fire department 
found the delay with lumps intolerable; 
emergency vehicles needed to slow to 13 
mph to cross the lumps.
Effects on Passenger Cars
Passenger cars are generally not able 
to straddle speed lumps due to their nar-
rower wheel tracks. The vertical deflection 
for them is similar to that with speed 
humps, as speed lumps and humps have 
similar heights, lengths (in the direction 
of travel) and profiles.
Although many jurisdictions have in-
stalled speed lumps, the speed and vol-
ume impacts have not been compiled and 
documented until now. The before and 
after results of 50 speed lump installations 
completed by the following eight U.S. 
cities have been summarized:
• Danville, California;
• Elk Grove, California;
• Huntsville, Alabama;
• Olympia, Washington;
• Oviedo, Florida;
• Sacramento, California;
• Seattle, Washington; and
• Vancouver, Washington.
A comparison of the before and af-
ter speeds from all study locations shows 
that, on average, speed lumps reduce the 
85th percentile speed by 25 percent, or 
9 mph. Speed lumps reduced the 85th 
percentile travel speed at all study loca-
tions. The speed reduction with lumps 
is comparable to that with speed humps, 
which according to ITE’s Traffic Calm-
ing State-of-the-Practice reduce speeds 
by an average of 23 percent, or 8 mph.3 
Therefore, speed lumps are as effective at 
reducing passenger car speeds as the most 
common “current” traffic calming device, 
the speed hump, and more effective than 
similar traffic calming devices such as 
speed tables (see Table 2). A comparison 
Table 1. Speeds of fire-rescue vehicles crossing speed lumps.
Speed lumps configuration
Outside lumps = 9'x10.5'
Center lump = 6'x10.5'
Spacing = 2'
Speed, mpha
Trials
(Approaches)
Fire engine 
City of Brea
Fire truckb 
(ladder) 
City of Brea
Fire engine
Los Angeles 
County
Straddle middle lump – uphill
24
17
14
Straddle middle lump – downhill
29
21
24
Stay in lane (directly over both lumps) – uphill
12
16
9
Stay in lane (directly over both lumps) – downhill
13
11
11
Notes:	 a Speeds recorded as vehicle crossed lumps.
Notes:	 1 Recorded using radar by La Habra Police Department.
Notes:	 b Normal operating speed on test roadway is 20 mph, per City of Brea Fire Department.
Table 2. Speed-reduction comparison between speed lumps  
and other similar traffic calming devices.
Device
Sample 
Size
85th Percentile Speed  
After Traffic Calming 
Change in 85th 
Percentile Speed with 
Traffic Calming
% Change in 85th 
Percentile Speed with 
Traffic Calming 
Speed lumps
50
27.0 mph
(3.3 mph)
-8.9 mph
(5.2 mph)
-25%
(10%)
12' humps
184
27.3
(4.0)
-7.8
(3.7)
-22
(-9)
14' humps
15
25.6
(2.1)
-7.7
(2.1)
-23
(6)
22' tables
78
29.2
(3.1)
-7.3
(3.4)
-20
(8)
Notes:	 Speeds shown are the averages (means) of the 85th percentile speeds for each sample.
	
Values in parentheses are standard deviations.
Source:	 Ewing, Reid. Traffic Calming State-of-the-Practice. Washington, DC, USA: ITE, 
1999, p. 104.  (All data except the data on speed lumps)

=== p.4 ===
ITE Journal / DEcEmbEr 2009  
29
of the pre-traffi c calming speeds of the 50 
individual speed lumps study locations 
and the data for speed humps from Traffi c 
Calming State-of-the-Practice shows that 
speed humps are being used on streets 
with somewhat lower initial speeds.
In addition to speed data, before and 
after volume data were collected at 18 
of the aforementioned study locations. 
Analysis of the volume data shows little 
or no reduction in traffi c volumes, and 
hence no diversion of traffi c, after imple-
mentation of speed lumps. In contrast, 
the average volume reduction with speed 
humps is on the order of 20 percent.4
The authors have two theories to explain 
the lack of volume reduction. Perhaps 
speed lumps are being installed on streets 
without good alternate routes or, alter-
natively, speed lumps may be viewed as 
less onerous than speed humps because 
the lumps, with their wheel cutouts, are 
perceived as requiring less slowing down. 
If a goal is to reduce traffi c volumes as 
well as speeds, speed lumps may not be 
as effective as speed humps. However, 
in many applications, traffi c diversion is 
not desirable, because the diverted traf-
fi c will end up on other local streets. In 
such cases, it may be preferable to simply 
reduce speeds without altering volumes, 
as speed lumps appear to do. 
Public perceptions are arguably as im-
portant as data when judging the effec-
tiveness of traffi c calming measures. For 
the test in La Habra, California, USA, 
the responses from nearby residents were 
favorable. The residents commented that 
they perceived a reduction in vehicle speeds 
and welcomed speed lumps as a new addi-
tion to their neighborhood. In San Diego, 
California, USA, a survey of drivers con-
ducted after the installation of speed lumps 
showed that 83 percent of the drivers pre-
ferred speed lumps to speed humps.5
Design Parameters
Six design parameters characterize 
speed lumps: shape, width, length, wheel 
gap, confi guration and bicycle and park-
ing accommodations. These design pa-
rameters, as described in this section, are 
based on a survey of jurisdictions across 
the United States and on tests conducted 
in La Habra, California, USA.
Speed lumps are generally constructed 
in a shape similar to speed humps, with 
parabolic or fl at-sloping sides. If asphalt 
speed lumps are exceptionally long in the 
direction of travel, then they take the shape 
of speed tables with fl at-sloping sides. 
Speed lump height is identical to that of 
speed humps and should be constructed to 
match local and national guidelines.
The width of speed lumps is the key to 
their effectiveness. Jurisdictions across the 
country use different center lump widths, 
varying from 5.5 feet to 7 feet in width. 
The majority of locations surveyed have an 
approximately 6-foot-wide center lump, 
which can be straddled by fi re-rescue ve-
hicles but not passenger cars. The inside-
to-inside tire width of typical passenger 
cars ranges from approximately 47 to 57 
inches (the latter fi gure for a larger truck-
type vehicle, such as the Dodge Ram 2500 
or Chevrolet Suburban). The inside-to-
inside front tire width for a fi re truck or 
engine is approximately 70 inches (the 
rear wheel gap of fi re vehicles is smaller 
due to the dual rear wheels). Therefore, an 
approximately 6-foot-wide center lump is 
the ideal width to minimize fi re-rescue de-
lay and discomfort while ensuring vertical 
defl ection for passenger cars. The tests in 
La Habra confi rmed that fi re-rescue ve-
hicles could traverse a 6-foot-wide center 
lump with minimal to no delay. Outside 
lumps are typically wider and cannot be 
straddled by passenger cars or trucks.
Speed lump lengths range from ap-
proximately 6 feet in Elk Grove, Califor-
nia, USA, to 22 feet in Arlington, Vir-
ginia, USA. The length of the lumps in 
the direction of travel is dependent on the 
desired effect on passenger cars. It is not 
a critical design factor for fi re-rescue ve-
hicles, as they can traverse the device with 
minimal defl ection. Shorter lumps, 12 
feet in length, can act like a speed hump 
to passenger cars, while longer lumps be-
gin to act as speed tables. In general, speed 
lump length should be similar to that of 
speed humps on streets with lower posted 
speeds (25 mph or less) and similar to 
speed tables on streets with higher posted 
speeds (30 mph or more). 
The lateral distance between lumps is 
crucial for fi re-rescue vehicles, and gaps of 
at least 1 foot must be provided. The tests 
in La Habra found that 1-foot spacing 
between the lumps resulted in minimal 
vertical defl ection of fi re-rescue vehicles. 
To increase the ease of navigation for fi re-
rescue drivers, a larger wheel gap of 2 feet 
was chosen as the optimum design. Tests 
in Sacramento, California, USA, have 
also confi rmed that 2-foot gaps between 
lumps are preferable to 1-foot gaps. All 
surveyed jurisdictions use between 1- to 
2-foot spacing between lumps.
The two outside lumps can vary in 
width according to the roadway width 
and the desired spacing between the curb 
and taper of the outside lump. The in-
tent is to design the outside lumps to act 
as speed humps to passenger cars (in La 
Habra, the ultimate width of the outside 
lumps was 9 feet on streets 36-feet wide). 
Designing them too small may encour-
age motorists to swerve in an attempt to 
straddle the lump, as has been observed 
in several surveyed jurisdictions.
Special consideration may be given to 
bicyclists when designing speed lumps. 
Seattle, Washington, USA, uses striping 
to direct bicyclists toward the center wheel 
cutout as opposed to going over the lump. 
Other jurisdictions leave a wide gap (from 
3 to 5 feet) between the outside lump and 
curb so bicycles can traverse the device 
without defl ection.
THE WIDTH oF SPEED 
lumPS IS THE KEY To 
THEIr EFFEcTIVEnESS. 
JurISDIcTIonS acroSS 
THE counTrY uSE 
DIFFErEnT cEnTEr 
lumP WIDTHS, VarYInG 
From 5.5 FEET To 
7 FEET In WIDTH. 

=== p.5 ===
30
ITE Journal / December 2009
As with speed humps, on-street parking 
and drainage are typically not a problem 
with speed lumps, as the outside lumps 
taper off before the gutter. Several surveyed 
jurisdictions restrict parking adjacent to the 
speed lumps, while others want to maxi-
mize on-street parking. There is no physical 
reason other than accommodation of bicy-
clists to restrict parking at speed lumps.
Rubber Versus Asphalt
Two common types of speed lumps 
exist: asphalt lumps created in place and 
prefabricated rubber lumps that are affixed 
to the roadway (refer to Figures 1 and 2). 
Each type has been used successfully in the 
United States, and their advantages and 
disadvantages are discussed in this section. 
Asphalt lumps are permanent while rubber 
lumps can be removed for street repairs or 
moved to another location.
Ease of Construction
Asphalt speed lumps require skilled 
construction crews to mold the mate-
rial in place, while prefabricated rubber 
lumps can be installed by maintenance 
crews. Prefabricated lumps consist of 
multiple interlocking sections that must 
be attached to the pavement using bolts, 
which can be a time-consuming task for 
local street-maintenance crews. 
Profile
Prefabricated rubber lumps are avail-
able in several predetermined vertical 
shapes. Prefabrication ensures that the 
profile is always the same and each lump 
is dimensionally consistent. However, pre-
fabrication also limits the options avail-
able with respect to deflection. Asphalt 
lumps can be constructed to match the 
specific needs and characteristics of a lo-
cal roadway.
Aesthetics
Appearance is an important attribute 
of traffic calming devices, especially to the 
residents that live with the devices on their 
streets. Asphalt speed lumps tend to blend 
with an asphalt roadway. Rubber speed 
lumps have been known to “stand out,” 
especially some models that use brightly 
colored squares for identification.
In Mobile, Alabama, USA, red-brick-
colored speed lumps have been used on 
several roadways, while speed lumps in 
Fremont, California, USA, look like a typ-
ical speed hump (see Figure 4). Fremont 
uses asphalt speed lumps with equally 
spaced striping between the lumps, in 
the direction of travel, which creates the 
optical illusion of a solid speed hump 
stretched across the roadway. Caution 
should be taken with this striping pat-
tern, as pedestrians may mistake the speed 
lumps for a crosswalk.
Costs
The cost of a speed lump set depends 
on multiple factors that include size of 
the lumps, width of the roadway and 
materials used. Rubber speed lumps, 
sold by several national companies, are 
generally priced the same in all parts of 
the country (approximately $3,000 to 
$4,000 for one set). In contrast, costs 
for the contractor-constructed asphalt 
speed lumps vary widely according to 
the quantity constructed and the level 
of contractor experience with the device. 
In some areas, asphalt is more expensive 
than rubber. In other areas, the reverse is 
true. For example, a set of asphalt speed 
lumps in Danville, California, USA, costs 
approximately $2,500 (including signing 
and striping), while a set in Austin, Texas, 
USA, can cost more than $6,000. In gen-
eral, speed lumps cost approximately the 
same as speed humps.
Conclusion
Speed lumps are effective at reduc-
ing speeds on residential roadways while 
meeting the needs of emergency respond-
ers. In before-and-after speed data, speed 
lumps reduced the 85th percentile speed 
Figure 4. Speed lumps striped to appear as a speed hump in Fremont, California.

=== p.6 ===
ITE Journal / December 2009 
31
by an average of approximately 9 mph, a 
reduction of 25 percent. The speed reduc-
tions associated with lumps are similar to 
those of the speed hump, the current most 
common traffic calming device. Speed 
lumps reduce the delay to fire-rescue ve-
hicles when compared to speed humps. 
Recent tests in this study found that fire-
rescue vehicles can traverse a set of speed 
lumps with minimal vertical deflection. 
A review of tests from other jurisdictions 
found that speed lumps cause little to no 
delay to fire-rescue vehicles.
The results of this study demon-
strate that fire department support can 
be achieved through proper speed lump 
design and demonstration. n
References
1. Ewing, Reid, et al. “Traffic Calming Prac-
tice Revisited.” ITE Journal, November 2005. 
Washington, DC, USA: ITE
2. Ewing, Reid. Traffic Calming State-of-the-
Practice. Washington, DC, USA: ITE, 1999.
3. Ibid.
4. Ibid.
5. Cliamé, Crystal. “Introducing Speed 
Lumps to San Diego.” Presentation at the 2003 
International American Public Works Association 
Congress and Exposition, August 24, 2003.
Jeff Gulden, 
P.E. is a senior transpor-
tation engineer for Fehr 
& Peers. His traffic 
calming experience 
includes development 
of neighborhood traffic 
management programs 
and plans for cities across California. He is a 
member of ITE.
Reid Ewing, 
Ph.D. is a research 
professor at the Na-
tional Center for Smart 
Growth, University of 
Maryland. He is the 
author of Traffic Calm-
ing State-of-the-Practice 
(ITE) and coauthor of U.S. Traffic Calming 
Manual (APA and ASCE).
