=== p1 ===
 
 
                                   ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY 
Number: V-9 
Issued: 11/10/10  
Revised: 9/13/2018 
Jurisdiction: City Council 
 
MOBILE COMMUNICATION DEVICE (MCD) USE POLICY 
 
I. 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to provide clear guidelines for the authorization, distribution and 
appropriate business use of Mobile Communication Devices (MCDs) by City employees and for the 
establishment of a cellular phone allowance. 
 
II. 
POLICY 
The City of Capitola recognizes that cellular Mobile Communication Devices (MCDs) enhance the 
level of City services by allowing employees to remain in contact with the office or with one another 
as the need arises. Technology has now made the MCD both practical and economical for work-
related use and this policy establishes procedures and conditions for their authorization and use, to 
ensure accountability and to prevent improper use.   This policy applies to the use of City issued 
cellular phones and the use of personal cellular phones for City business. The use of licensed 
frequency radio communication devices by personnel in the City Police Department is excluded from 
this policy. 
 
III. 
DEFINITIONS 
Mobile Communication Devices (MCDs) include any mobile communication device that provides 
for voice and/or data communications between two or more parties including, but not limited to, a 
cellular telephone, a text message device, a personal digital assistant, a smart phone, an air card, or a 
tablet that utilizes a wireless signal to provide Internet access. 
 
Emergency responders are those employees the City Manager determines to have an essential role in 
responding to City emergencies. 
 
IV. 
PROCEDURE 
A. PLAN ELEGIBILITY: The City Manager has the responsibility of determining who shall 
be issued a City cell phone and who shall be part of a voice or voice/data stipend. The 
following criterion are to be considered: 
1. Departmental requirements indicate having a cell phone is an integral part of 
performing the duties in the job description. 
2. Performance of work that requires the employee to be out of the office on a regular 
basis where availability of conventional telephones is limited, and the employee 
needs to be in contact with the office or key City personnel at all times. 
3. Required to be on-call outside of normal work hours. 
4. Critical decision maker. 
5. Quantity of calls/minutes used. 
6. Need for access and frequent updates to calendar, email, contacts, SMS and files 
while not in the office. 
B. PLAN TYPES: The City provides for a two-tier cellular phone system. 
1. City-Issued Cell Phones: The City contracts with a service provider for a pool of 
minutes to be accessed by users using a City-issued Cellular phone. The City 
recognizes the employees will on occasion, need to make or receive personal 
telephone calls subject to the limitations in 3(b) of this policy. 
2. Monthly Cell Phone Stipend: The City issues stipends to eligible employees who in 
turn provide their own cell phone to use for City business. 
C. CITY-ISSUED CELL PHONES 
1. Cell phones and wireless electronic data devices may be issued to employees to 
enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of communication. The City shall ensure 

=== p2 ===
Administrative Policy V-9 
Mobile Communication Devices (MCD) Use Policy 
Page 2 of 3 
that cell phone use is appropriate and that public funds are prudently spent. 
2. A City-owned cell phone are intended to be used for official City business. Personal 
use of City cell phones should be kept to a minimum.  
3. Employees should immediately report unauthorized use, theft or loss of a City- 
owned phone to their supervisor and/or Department Head and the City Information 
Technology staff. In the case of a lost or damaged City-owned phone or accessory, 
the employee may be responsible for reimbursing the City for the value of the 
equipment if the employee is determined to be negligent for its loss. 
4. All MCDs that are used for City business may be subject to the Public Records Act. 
5. All communications on a City-owned cell phone are subject to monitoring and the 
employee shall consent to such monitoring at the time of receipt of the City-owned 
cell phone. 
D. MONTHLY CELL PHONE STIPEND 
1. In lieu of a City-issued cellular phone, an employee may be paid a stipend for use of 
their personal cell phones for City business. The City Manager will determine which 
employees will be eligible. 
2. Allowance amounts will be in the amount of: 
3. $45 per month for cellular and data. 
4. The monthly allowance is intended to cover the portion of an employee's cell phone 
costs related to City business, and not off-set the entire cost of a cell phone. 
5. The allowance shall be paid to the designated employee by the City on a bi- weekly 
basis and is subject to required taxes. 
6. Employees who receive a stipend must provide the City a cell phone number where 
the employee can be reached. 
7. The cell phone will be personally owned and under the responsibility of the 
employee. As the cell phone is personally owned by the employee, and the provided 
allowance is taxable income, the employee may use the cell phone for both business 
and personal purposes, as needed. 
8. Employees approved to receive a stipend shall be responsible for purchasing their 
own cell phone and enrolling it in their own monthly access plan. 
9. Failure to carry the designated cell phone or respond to calls may lead to revocation 
of cell phone stipend. 
10. Non-Exempt employees shall not use the data portion of their cell phone for city 
business during non-working hours without prior approval from their supervisor. 
11. All work-related communications on cell phones under the City’s monthly cell-
phone stipend are subject to monitoring and the employee shall consent to such 
monitoring upon initial receipt of the stipend. 
E. SAFETY 
1. State law prohibits the use of cell phones while operating a vehicle unless the driver 
is using a hands-free device. There are two (2) exceptions to the law: 
a. Emergency services personnel are exempt from this law when operating an 
authorized emergency vehicle. 
b. The law does not apply to persons using their cell phone to contact law 
enforcement or public safety agencies for emergency purposes. 
2. With the exception of the above, employees shall not operate cellular phones and 
other wireless devices that may distract from safely operating a motor vehicle. Using 
cell phones or other devices while driving leads to increased risk of accident and 
liability to the City.  To limit this risk, all employees shall adhere to the following: 
a. Use a hands-free device if employee must make or receive a call. 
b. Make calls before starting the vehicle and proceeding to your destination. 
c. Pull over or park in an appropriate manner before initiating a call. 
d. Allow voice mail to handle the incoming calls and return them at your safe 
convenience. 
e. Personal calls, except emergencies, while operating a City-owned vehicle 
are prohibited. 

=== p3 ===
