=== page 1 ===
Standard Licence Conditions2
2 Regulations made by the City of Westminster pursuant to Section 40(1) of the 
London Local Authorities Act 2000 prescribing the standard 
conditions which will be applicable to all licences to busk, except when 
expressly excluded or amended in any particular case
2
1)
Each busker and street entertainer must clearly display
their busking and street entertainment licence during any
performance, and this must be made available for immediate
inspection on the request of any person authorised by the
Council or by any Police Officer or any Police Community
Support Officer.
2)
Each busker and street entertainer requires a busking
and street entertainment licence, whether performing individually
or as part of a busking and street entertainment group.  For group
performances, each member of the group needs to have a valid
busking and street entertainment licence. Busking and street
entertainment licences cannot be transferred or used by any
person other than the named person on the licence.
3)
Each busker and street entertainer must be familiar with
and adhere to the Westminster Busking and Street Entertainment
Policy, the extent of the busking and street entertainment
regulated areas, the location of designated and marked busking
pitches and any terms and conditions that apply in respect of each
of the designated and marked pitches.
4)
Each busker and street entertainer must obtain and hold
a valid certificate of no less than £2 million public liability
insurance which must be made available for immediate inspection
on the request of any person authorised by the Council or by any
Police Officer or any Police Community Support Officer.
5)
Each busking and street entertainment licence holder
must comply with any request given by any person authorised by
the Council or by any Police Officer or any Police Community
Support Officer regarding the busking or street entertainment,
which may include directions to stop performing.
6)
Each busker and street entertainer must ensure that
sound as a result of any performance does not cause nuisance to
persons in nearby property and levels must be immediately
reduced on the request of any person authorised by the Council
or by any Police Officer or any Police Community Support
Officer.
(7)
Each busker and street entertainer must ensure their
performance and audience does not cause an unreasonable
obstruction to pedestrians, road users and neighbouring
property.  An unreasonable obstruction is likely to be caused if a
wheelchair or double pushchair cannot comfortably move past.
(8)
All buskers and street entertainers must have a valid
Busking and Street Entertainment Licence to perform at any of
the designated and marked pitches within the busking and street
entertainment regulated areas.
25
BUSKING AND STREET ENTERTAINMENT IN WESTMINSTER
(9)
Busking and street entertainment is permitted at any of
the designated and marked pitches within the busking and street
entertainment regulated areas from Monday to Sunday between the
hours of 10am and 9pm, with the exception of
- Pitch 6 (Chinatown), where busking and street entertainment is
only permitted from Monday to Friday between the hours of 10am
and 9pm.
- Pitch 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 (Covent Garden) only  permits
performances between 11am – 9pm.
- Pitch 23 (King Charles) will only  permit performances in this
location on Sundays only.
(10)
All busking and street entertainment must be contained
within the designated and marked busking pitch. This means that all
the buskers and street entertainers, the performance itself and
anything used in connection with the performance must be within
the designated and marked pitch. If a performance cannot be
contained within the designated area it is unsuitable for that pitch.
(11)
Only one busking and street entertainment performance
is permitted at any one time in any of the designated busking
pitches.
(12)
Busking and street entertainment performances must not
be longer than 40 minutes from start to finish.
(13)
No amplified, wind, brass, percussion or percussive
busking or street entertainment performances are permitted, with
the exception of
- Pitch 1 (Marble Arch),
- Pitch 9 (Leicester Square North East)
- Pitch 15 (St Pauls Church)
- Pitch 17 (Trafalgar Square Charing Cross Road),
- Pitch 23 (King Charles Statue)
These pitches permit amplification and such instruments only 
where the sound does not cause a nuisance to persons in nearby 
property.  
- Pitch 12 (Market Square/James Street) permits vocal amplification
only where the sound does not cause a nuisance to persons in
nearby property.
The council does not permit the use of external power sources 
with amplifiers (e.g. battery packs or generators). 
(14)
No naked flame, pyrotechnics, fireworks, knives, sharp
objects or similar shall be used as part of the performance.  No
unlicensed animals shall accompany the buskers and street
entertainers nor be used as part of the performance.
(15)
Pitches may be suspended in the event of an emergency,
public disorder, planned events, or to prevent a nuisance being
caused.  Buskers and street entertainers must immediately comply
with any requirement to cease busking that may be given by any
person authorised by the Council or by any Police Officer or any
Police Community Support Officer in those circumstances.
