=== p1
STATE OF CALIFORNIA - NATURAL RESOURCES AGENCY 
 GAVIN NEWSOM, GOVERNOR 
 
CALIFORNIA COASTAL COMMISSION 
SOUTH COAST DISTRICT OFFICE 
301 E. OCEAN BLVD, SUITE 300 
LONG BEACH, CA 90802-4325 
VOICE (562) 590-5071 
FAX (562) 590-5084 
W13a 
Filed: 
01/08/2020 
49th Day: 
Waived 
Staff: 
V. Lee-LB 
Staff Report: 
06/18/2020 
Hearing Date: 
07/08/2020 
STAFF REPORT: APPEAL – SUBSTANTIAL ISSUE & DE NOVO 
Appeal No.: 
A-5-LGB-20-0001 
Applicant: 
City of Laguna Beach (Public Works Dept.) 
Local Government: 
City of Laguna Beach 
Local Decision: 
Approval with no conditions 
Appellants: 
Mark & Sharon Fudge 
Project Location:   
Public streets and public and private parking lots 
citywide, Laguna Beach, Orange County 
Project Description: Appeal of City of Laguna Beach Local Coastal Development 
Permit No. 19-5151 to establish a multi-year, multi-phase parking rate structure for 
public meters and public and private lots/structures located citywide for summer and 
non-summer months. The permit approved an immediate increase of $1 for all 
meters and lots, no increase the following two years, and then an increase of 25% 
annually, not to exceed 50% in a rolling three-year period for non-summer months; 
and, for summer months, an immediate increase of 25%, and subsequent increases 
of up to 25% annually, not to exceed 50% in a rolling three-year period, for all 
downtown meters and metered lots. The rates for non-downtown meters and lots will 
be governed by the non-summer rate structure. 
Staff Recommendation: 
Determine that a substantial issue exists, and approve 
the permit application with conditions. 
 

=== p2
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
2 
 
IMPORTANT HEARING PROCEDURE NOTE:  The Commission will not take public 
testimony during the “substantial issue” phase of the appeal hearing unless at least three 
Commissioners request it. If the Commission finds that the appeal raises a substantial 
issue, the “de novo” phase of the hearing will follow, during which the Commission will take 
public testimony. 
SUMMARY OF STAFF RECOMMENDATION 
The City’s action on Local Coastal Development Permit (“CDP”) No. 19-5151 approved an 
indefinite authorization of parking rate increases for all public meters and lots/structures 
located citywide. Staff recommends that the Commission first determine that a substantial 
issue exists with respect to the grounds on which this appeal has been filed for the 
following reasons: (1) the City’s decision did not consider eliminating or significantly 
reducing the cost of parking permits for fuel-efficient or alternative-fuel vehicles pursuant to 
LUE Action 1.1.6 of the certified Local Coastal Program (“LCP”); (2) the City’s decision did 
not adequately reduce conflicts between visitor-serving uses/infrastructure and residents; 
and (3) the indefinite authorization of the citywide parking rate increase would significantly 
impact public access and recreational opportunities to and along the coastline of Laguna 
Beach, and would disproportionately impact members of the underserved communities, 
who have less disposable income and fewer options for enjoying public access to and 
recreation on the coast. 
Staff then recommends approval of the permit application with three (3) special 
conditions that require the City to: (1) limit its implementation of the parking rate increases 
to a limited term (three-year) authorization period; (2) implement the additional language 
accessibility program for the purpose of advertising its peripheral parking and free trolley 
program in languages other than English; and (3) implement parking incentives for fuel-
efficient or alternative-fuel vehicles. 
 
 

=== p3
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
3 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
I. 
MOTION AND RESOLUTION – SUBSTANTIAL ISSUE .......................... 4 
II. APPELLANTS’ CONTENTIONS .............................................................. 4 
III. LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACTION ............................................................. 5 
IV.  APPEAL PROCEDURES ......................................................................... 5 
V. FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS – SUBSTANTIAL ISSUE .................. 7 
A. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND LOCATION .................................................................... 7 
B. LOCAL COASTAL PROGRAM CERTIFICATION .............................................................. 8 
C. FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED IN SUBSTANTIAL ISSUE ANALYSIS ............................... 8 
D. SUBSTANTIAL ISSUE ANALYSIS ................................................................................. 9 
VI.  MOTION AND RESOLUTION – DE NOVO REVIEW ............................. 26 
VII.  STANDARD CONDITIONS ................................................................... 26 
VIII. SPECIAL CONDITIONS ....................................................................... 27 
IX. FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS – DE NOVO ..................................... 28 
A. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION ...................................................................................... 28 
B. 
STANDARD OF REVIEW ....................................................................................... 28 
C. 
PUBLIC ACCESS .................................................................................................. 29 
D. 
ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE .................................................................................... 31 
E. 
PROMOTION OF FUEL-EFFICIENT OR ALTERNATIVE-FUEL VEHICLES ........................ 33 
F. 
LOCAL COASTAL PROGRAM ............................................................................... 34 
G. 
CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA) ........................................ 34 
APPENDICES 
Appendix A – Substantive File Documents 
EXHIBITS 
Exhibit 1 – Project Location 
Exhibit 2 – City Resolution for Local CDP No. 19-5154 
Exhibit 3 – Appeal 
Exhibit 4 – City’s 2019 Parking Occupancy Data  
Exhibit 5 – City’s Parking Rate Comparison Chart 
 
 

=== p4
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
4 
I. 
MOTION AND RESOLUTION – SUBSTANTIAL ISSUE 
Motion: I move that the Commission determine that Appeal No. A-5-LGB-20-0001 
raises NO Substantial Issue with respect to the grounds on which the appeal has 
been filed under § 30603 of the Coastal Act. 
Staff recommends a NO vote.  Following the staff recommendation on this motion will 
result in the Commission proceeding to conduct a de novo review of the application, and 
adoption of the following resolution and findings.  Conversely, passage of this motion 
would result in a finding of No Substantial Issue and the local action would become final 
and effective.  The motion passes only by an affirmative vote of the majority of the 
appointed Commissioners present. 
Resolution: The Commission hereby finds that Appeal No. A-5-LGB-20-0001 
presents a SUBSTANTIAL ISSUE with respect to the grounds on which the appeal 
has been filed under Section 30603 of the Coastal Act regarding consistency with 
the certified Local Coastal Plan and/or the public access policies of the Coastal Act. 
II. 
APPELLANTS’ CONTENTIONS 
On January 8, 2020, Mark and Sharon Fudge filed an appeal of the City-issued CDP for 
parking rate increases citywide (Exhibit 3). The appellants raise the following concerns 
with the City-approved parking rate structure: 
1) The City’s action did not maximize protection of the community’s coastal and 
other natural resources; 
2) The City’s action is not adequately committed to creating a sustainable 
community as provided by the certified LCP; 
3) The City’s action did not consider the impact of parking rate increase on Laguna 
Beach’s traffic conditions and community character; 
4) The City did not proactively participate in the planning activities of regional and 
adjacent jurisdictions in its approval as required by the certified LCP; 
5) The City’s action did not follow the policies of its General Plan;  
6) The City’s action did not adequately maximize public access to and along the 
coast, nor did it consider environmental justice in the approval of the parking rate 
increases. 
In addition to the points raised in their appeal, at the March hearing, the appellants voiced 
their concern that a complete copy of Laguna Beach’s certified LCP has not been provided 
to the public, thus making it uncertain which rules apply for this project. At the time this 
staff report was published, the complete copy of the certified LCP had been shared with 
the appellants, as well as published on the City’s website. Therefore, appellants, and the 
public generally, have full access to the LCP, allowing them to assess the extent to which 
the above allegations identify inconsistencies with the certified Laguna Beach LCP. 
 

=== p5
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
5 
III. 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACTION 
On December 4, 2019, the City of Laguna Beach Planning Commission held a public 
hearing and approved CDP No. 19-5154, which allows the establishment of a multi-year, 
multi-phase parking rate structure for public parking meters and public and private 
lots/structures located citywide, with different provisions for how the rates could change for 
summer and non-summer months (Exhibit 2). 
The project description of Resolution No. 19-5154 (Exhibit 2) approving Local CDP No. 
19-5154 reads as follows: 
“The following Citywide parking rate structure shall be effective as 
of January 1, 2020: 
Non-Summer Months: Citywide, immediate increase of $1.00 for 
all meters and lots/structures (excluding Lot 15 and with 
exceptions to Lot 7 and Lot 8). No increase for the following two 
years, and then increase of up to 25 percent annually, not to 
exceed 50 percent in a rolling three-year period. 
Summer Months: All downtown meters and metered lots, 
immediate increase of 25 percent, up to a maximum of 25 
percent increase annually, not to exceed 50% in a rolling three-
year period. Non-downtown meters and lots/structures will stay 
at the same non-summer rate. 
Exceptions: Treasure Island Surface Lot and the Treasure Island 
Garage, year-round rates should be $4.00/hour; and Act V 
Parking Lot rates should be $10.00 all day on the weekends and 
$7.00 all day on the weekdays during summer months.” 
On December 23, 2019, the Coastal Commission’s South Coast District Office received a 
valid Notice of Final Action (NOFA) for Local CDP No. 19-5154. The Commission issued a 
Notification of Appeal Period on December 24, 2019. On January 8, 2020, during the ten 
(10) working day appeal period, Mr. and Mrs. Fudge filed this appeal (Exhibit 3). No other 
appeals were received.  The City and applicants were notified of the appeal by 
Commission staff in a letter dated January 8, 2020. The appeal was originally scheduled 
for March 2020 hearing, but was postponed due to the request by Mr. and Mrs. Fudge 
calling out the need for the public to review the complete document of certified Laguna 
Beach LCP. 
IV.  APPEAL PROCEDURES 
After certification of LCPs, the Coastal Act provides for limited appeals to the Coastal 
Commission of certain local government actions on coastal development permit 
applications. Development projects approved by cities or counties may be appealed if they 
are located within certain geographic appealable areas, such as those located between the 
sea and the first public road paralleling the sea or within 100 feet of any wetland, estuary, 
or stream, or within 300 feet of the top of the seaward face of a coastal bluff.  Furthermore, 

=== p6
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
6 
developments approved by counties may be appealed if they are not a designated 
"principal permitted use" under the certified LCP.  Finally, any local government action on a 
proposed development that would constitute a major public work or a major energy facility 
may be appealed, whether approved or denied by the city or county [Coastal Act Section 
30603(a)]. 
Section 30603 of the Coastal Act states in relevant part: 
 (a)  After certification of its Local Coastal Program, an action taken by a local 
government on a Coastal Development Permit application may be 
appealed to the Commission for only the following types of developments: 
(1)  Developments approved by the local government between the sea and 
the first public road paralleling the sea or within 300 feet of the inland 
extent of any beach or of the mean high tide line of the sea where there 
is no beach, whichever is the greater distance. 
(2) Developments approved by the local government not included within 
paragraph (1) that are located on tidelands, submerged lands, public trust 
lands, within 100 feet of any wetland, estuary, stream, or within 300 feet 
of the top of the seaward face of any coastal bluff. 
. . . 
(5) Any development which constitutes a major public works project . . . . 
Much of the project is in appealable areas because some of the public parking areas are 
located between the sea and the first public road paralleling the sea, within 300 feet of the 
inland extent of a beach or the top of a coastal bluff, or within 100 feet of a stream. (See 
Section 30603(a)(1) & (2), quoted above.)  However, regardless of the location, because 
the project would result in an increase in citywide parking rates, it involves “publicly 
financed recreational facilities that serve, affect, or otherwise impact regional or statewide 
use of the coast by increasing or decreasing public recreational opportunities or facilities.”  
Cal. Code Regs., tit. 14, § 13012(b) (defining such facilities as “major public works”). 
Therefore, the project qualifies as a major public works for Coastal Act purposes, and 
pursuant to Section 30603(a)(5), above, any development that constitutes a major public 
works project may be appealed to the Commission after certification of local coastal 
program. Therefore, the project in its entirety, regardless of whether portions of the 
project area falls within appealable area or non-appealable area, is appealable to the 
Commission.  
Grounds for Appeal 
The grounds for appeal of an approved local CDP in the appealable area are stated in 
Section 30603(b)(1): 
The grounds for an appeal pursuant to subdivision (a) shall be limited to an 
allegation that the development does not conform to the standards set forth in 

=== p7
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
7 
the certified Local Coastal Program or the public access policies set forth in 
this division. 
Section 30625(b)(2) of the Coastal Act requires the Commission to conduct a de novo 
review of the appealed project unless the Commission determines that no substantial 
issue exists with respect to the grounds on which an appeal has been filed pursuant to 
Section 30603(a). If Commission staff recommends a finding that a substantial issue 
does exist, and there is no motion from the Commission to find no substantial issue, the 
substantial issue question will be considered presumed, and the Commission will 
conduct the de novo portion of the public hearing on the merits of the project. A de novo 
review of the application on the merits uses the certified LCP as the standard of review. 
(Section 30604(b).) In addition, for projects located between the first public road and the 
sea, a specific finding must be made at the de novo stage of the appeal that any 
approved project is consistent with the public access and recreation policies of the 
Coastal Act. (Section 30604(c).)  Sections 13110-13120 of Title 14 of the California Code 
of Regulations further explain the appeal hearing process. 
Qualifications to Testify before the Commission 
If the Commission, by a vote of three (3) or more Commissioners, decides to hear 
arguments and vote on the substantial issue question, proponents and opponents will have 
an opportunity to address whether the appeal raises a substantial issue.  The time limit for 
public testimony will be set by the chair at the time of the hearing.  As noted in Section 
13117 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations, the only persons qualified to testify 
before the Commission at the substantial issue portion of the appeal process are the 
applicant, persons who opposed the application before the local government (or their 
representatives), and the local government.  In this case, the City’s record reflects that 
Mark and Sharon Fudge opposed the project in person at the local hearing. Testimony 
from other persons must be submitted in writing. 
Upon the close of the public hearing, the Commission will vote on the substantial issue 
question. It takes a majority of Commissioners present to find that no substantial issue is 
raised by the local approval of the subject project. If the Commission finds that the appeal 
raises a substantial issue, the de novo phase of the hearing will immediately follow, 
during which the Commission will take public testimony. 
V. 
FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS – SUBSTANTIAL ISSUE 
A. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND LOCATION 
The project (proposed parking rate increases) is a component of the implementation 
strategies of the City’s Downtown Specific Plan Area & Laguna Canyon Road 
Parking Management Plan (more commonly known as the 2013 Parking 
Management Plan; “2013 PMP”). The City’s 2013 PMP was intended to achieve 
goals to manage parking more efficiently, such as increasing parking capacity, 
reducing traffic congestion, and encouraging alternative transportation. Specific 
strategies included parking technology upgrades, improved signage, real-time 
information on parking availability, public outreach and marketing, improving 
walkability, promoting alternate forms of mobility, and best practice enforcement 

=== p8
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
8 
strategies. The PMP has not been certified for inclusion in the LCP by the Coastal 
Commission.   
The City-approved project is described as the establishment of a multi-year, multi-
phase parking rate structure for all public parking meters and lots/structures located 
citywide for summer and non-summer months as outlined in Attachment A of City 
Resolution No. 19-5154 (Exhibit 2). For non-summer months, the Citywide parking 
rate structure would result in an immediate increase of $1.00 for all meters and 
lots/structures (excluding Lot 15 and with exceptions to Lot 7 and Lot 8), no increase 
for the following two years, and then increase of up to 25 percent annually, not to 
exceed 50 percent in a rolling three-year period. For summer-months (mid-June to 
early September), all downtown meters and metered lots would result in an 
immediate increase of 25 percent, up to a maximum of 25 percent increase annually, 
not to exceed 50 percent in a rolling three-year period. Non-downtown meters and 
lots/structures will stay at the same non-summer rate for summer months. The 
parking rate structure would make exceptions to Treasure Island Surface Lot and the 
Treasure Island Garage, where the year-round rates would be $4.00 per hour; and 
Act V Parking Lot, where the rates would be $10.00 all day on the weekends and 
$7.00 all day on the weekdays during summer months. 
The public parking meters and lots/structures affected by the City-approved CDP are 
concentrated in the downtown area, near Main Beach, and along the Laguna Canyon 
Road and the coastline of Laguna Beach (adjacent to other popular beaches). Many 
of the parking spaces are located on both sides of Coast Highway, the first public 
road from the ocean (Exhibit 1). The City of Laguna Beach operates a free trolley 
program that serves the downtown area and most of the public beaches along the 
shoreline. The trolley also picks up visitors who park at the peripheral parking lots. 
B. LOCAL COASTAL PROGRAM CERTIFICATION 
The City of Laguna Beach LCP was certified on January 13, 1993.  The City’s LCP is 
comprised of a Land Use Plan (LUP) and an Implementation Plan (IP). The City’s Land 
Use Plan is comprised of a variety of planning documents including the Land Use Element 
(LUE), Open Space/Conservation Element, Technical Appendix, and Fuel Modification 
Guidelines (of the Safety General Element of the City’s General Plan as adopted by 
Resolution 89.104). The Implementation Plan portion of the certified LCP is comprised of 
over 10 documents, including Title 25, the City’s Zoning Code. The Coastal Land Use 
Element of the LCP was updated and replaced in its entirety via LCPA 1-10 in 2012. The 
Open Space/Conservation Element and Title 25 have been amended a number of times 
since original certification. Laguna Beach has a certified LCP, but there are four areas of 
deferred certification in the City: Irvine Cove, Blue Lagoon, Hobo Canyon, and Three Arch 
Bay. The project is located within the City of Laguna Beach’s certified jurisdiction and is 
subject to the policies of the certified LCP and the public access policies of the Coastal 
Act. 
C. FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED IN SUBSTANTIAL ISSUE ANALYSIS  
Section 30625(b)(2) of the Coastal Act requires a de novo hearing of the appealed project 
unless the Commission determines that no substantial issue exists with respect to the 

=== p9
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
9 
grounds on which the appeal has been filed pursuant to Section 30603(a) of the Coastal 
Act.  The term “substantial issue” is not defined in the Coastal Act or its implementing 
regulations.  Section 13115(c) of the Commission regulations provides that the 
Commission may consider the following five factors when determining if a local action 
raises a significant issue: 
1. The degree of factual and legal support for the local government’s decision that 
the development is consistent or inconsistent with the certified LCP; 
2. The extent and scope of the development as approved or denied by the local 
government; 
3. The significance of the coastal resources affected by the decision; 
4. The precedential value of the local government’s decision for future 
interpretations of its LCP; and 
5. Whether the appeal raises local issues, or those of regional or statewide 
significance. 
The Commission may, but need not, assign a particular weight to a factor. 
Staff is recommending that the Commission find that a substantial issue exists with 
respect to the grounds on which an appeal has been filed pursuant to Section 30603(a) of 
the Coastal Act. 
D. SUBSTANTIAL ISSUE ANALYSIS 
As stated in Section IV of this report, the grounds for an appeal of a CDP issued by the 
local government are the project’s conformity with the policies of the LCP and with the 
public access policies of the Coastal Act. As discussed in detail below, some of the 
appellants’ arguments raise no substantial issue in this regard, while some of the 
appellants’ arguments do raise a substantial issue regarding consistency with the policies 
of the certified LCP or the public access policies of the Coastal Act. Therefore, Staff is 
recommending that the Commission find that a substantial issue exists with respect to the 
grounds on which an appeal has been filed pursuant to Section 30603(a) of the Coastal 
Act. 
Appellants’ Argument No. 1: Failure to Protect the City’s Coastal and Other Natural 
Resources. 
The appellants contend that the City did not adequately consider Goal 4 of the LUE, 
which is to enhance the visitor experience while maximizing protection of the 
community’s coastal and other natural resources. 
Goal 4 of the LUE of the certified Land Use Plan (LUP) states, in relevant parts: 
Recognizing that Laguna Beach is a worldwide visitor destination, enhance the 
visitor experience while maximizing protection of the community's coastal and 
other natural resources. 
Intent - The increasing number of visitors to Laguna Beach requires the protection 
of the community's sensitive coastal and other natural resources. The intent of the 
following policies and actions is to enhance the visitor experience along the coast, 

=== p10
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
10 
while minimizing impacts on Laguna Beach's natural resources. The primary 
method of implementing this goal is through development of a Coastal Resources 
Protection Program. Elements of such a program include, but are not necessarily 
limited to, the following: 1) Potential rezoning of designated areas adjacent to the 
coast to provide visitor-serving uses that include a mix of commercial uses and 
public services and facilities. Potential sites would be designated based on their 
potential to accommodate high levels of visitor traffic with minimal impact on 
sensitive coastal resources and minimal effects on neighboring land uses. The 
intent of potential rezoning would be to serve the City's increasing number of 
beach visitors and enhance coastal access, while redirecting beach activity from 
locations identified as more environmentally sensitive to less sensitive beach 
areas. 2) Ongoing coastal resource protection through enforcement and public 
education. 3) Potential impact fee on new visitor-serving land uses benefiting from 
visitor activity that would help offset costs associated with protecting coastal 
resources from the increasing number of community visitors. 4) Identification of a 
site for development of a Coastal Resources Interpretive Center. [emphasis added] 
LUE Action 4.1.3: 
Evaluate and, if appropriate, establish a fair-share impact fee 
for land uses and development benefiting from visitor activity for the purpose of 
offsetting costs related to the Coastal Resources Protection Program. 
Specifically, the appellants assert that the City’s action is inconsistent with the above 
Goal because the City’s record does not make clear that the parking revenues will be 
used to establish a fair-share impact fee to offset costs related to the protection of 
Coastal Resources pursuant to LUE Action 4.1.3. However, LUE Action 4.1.3 doesn’t 
require that all new revenues be used for that purpose.  In addition, it refers to the 
imposition of such a fee on new visitor-serving land uses that benefit from visitor activity, 
which the current program does not involve, so the increased parking revenues are 
distinct from the revenue that this Action envisions being generated by the fair-share 
impact fee.  Moreover, Goal 4 does not require the establishment of such a fee (the 
Intent section refers to it only as a “potential” fee, and the Action only requires its 
establishment “if appropriate”), and it only discusses the creation of such a fee for the 
purpose of offsetting costs related to the Coastal Resource Protection Program (and the 
Intent section discusses such a fee as an element of that program). The City has not yet 
established the Coastal Resource Protection Program as contemplated by the LCP. The 
City’s action to establish a citywide parking rate structure did not require evaluation of a 
fair-share impact fee, because the City does not have a Coastal Resource Protection 
Program in place. If and when the City does establish a Coastal Resource Protection 
Program, the land uses which pay into the program will be determined, and specific 
impact fees will be established. The appellants assert that the lack of Coastal Resources 
Protection Program has diminished the opportunity to use increased parking revenues to 
protect natural resources and request the Commission to make recommendations to the 
City that will result in funds being redirected towards protecting natural resources 
impacted by visitors. The appellants also assert that the parking revenues should be 
used to mitigate the impacts of visitors to the area and provide new parking options, and 
should not be used for fire safety measures or historic preservation as approved by the 

=== p11
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
11 
City. However, neither LUE Action 4.1.3 nor any policy in the certified LCP of which the 
Commission is aware requires parking revenues to be used for parking related measures 
or for protection of natural resources impacted by visitors. 
In connection with this first contention, the appellants also point to LUE Policy 4.2, which 
states: 
Promote policies to accommodate visitors, reduce conflicts between visitor-serving 
uses/infrastructure and residents, and reduce impacts on the City's natural 
resources. 
The appellants argue that the City staff and Planning Commission failed to develop 
mitigation efforts for the impacts of the parking rate increases to residential 
neighborhoods. The establishment of a citywide parking rate structure is intended to 
reduce the occupancy rates of congested downtown public parking spaces by promoting 
the use of peripheral parking lots and alternate modes of transportation. The project, 
including the peripheral parking lots and free shuttles, would redirect some of the 
downtown parking demand, expanding the options for residents and visitors. Providing 
additional parking and transportation options may reduce conflicts between visitor-
serving uses/infrastructures and residents near the downtown area. However, there is 
also a potential that the increase in parking fee in the downtown area would redirect 
motorists looking for cheaper parking into the surrounding residential neighborhoods, 
where the general public can park without a fee. In that case, the parking rate structure 
could increase conflicts between visitor-serving uses/infrastructure and residents, 
particularly if the parking fees increase at the high rates proposed by the City over the 
next three years and continue to increase indefinitely, and if additional parking 
alternatives are not provided. The City did not provide enough analysis to determine the 
immediate and future effect of the parking fee increases. Therefore, the appellants’ claim 
does raise a substantial issue of nonconformity with LUE Policy 4.2. 
Finally, the appellants also point to LUE Action 4.2.5, which states: 
Plan and develop a peripheral parking program to increase mass transit access to 
Laguna Beach's visitor-serving beaches and other amenities. The peripheral 
parking program shall include an investigation of the concept of shared parking, 
such as the use of public parking lots and underutilized private parking lots that 
could serve as peripheral parking locations. The implementation of such a 
program would require a coastal development permit. 
The appellants assert that the peripheral parking program was developed in 2013 but 
was never issued a CDP as required by LUE Action 4.2.5. However, the subject of this 
appeal is the citywide parking rate increase, not the peripheral parking program. The City 
is applying for a CDP to increase citywide parking rates in order to implement the 
peripheral parking program and comply with LUE Action 4.2.5.  The proposed parking 
rate structure is one portion of the peripheral parking program’s implementation, which 
qualifies as development and requires a coastal development permit. Considering that 
the original intent of the peripheral parking program was to alleviate traffic/parking 
congestion in the saturated downtown area by encouraging peripheral parking and 

=== p12
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
12 
facilitating the free shuttle program, the establishment of fees for both the downtown area 
and the peripheral lots is necessary to implement the program, as it creates the 
increased incentive to use those peripheral lots. Raising the parking rate in the downtown 
area will discourage motorists from parking in the popular downtown metered zones and 
lots/structures, thereby helping implement the peripheral parking program. 
Therefore, the Commission finds that the appeal does raise a substantial issue with 
respect to the project’s consistency with LCP policies to enhance the visitor experience 
while protecting the City’s coastal and other natural resources. 
Appellants’ Argument No. 2: Failure to Create a Sustainable Community 
The appellants contend the City’s approval did not consider Goal 1 of the LUE. 
 
LUE Goal 1: Create a community that is sustainable, resilient, and regenerative. 
Intent – The City is committed to meeting its ongoing needs without compromising 
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. The City recognizes the 
magnitude of the threat that climate change poses. The City can move toward 
sustainability and a reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by the way it manages 
land development and building construction, conserves habitats and natural 
resources, provides efficient transportation and mobility systems, and develops its 
infrastructure and public services. Sites should be planned, buildings designed, and 
infrastructure developed to reduce the consumption of energy, water, and raw 
materials, generation of waste, and use of toxic and hazardous substances.  
[emphasis added] 
Citing the above LUE Goal, the appellants assert that the City can move toward 
sustainability and a reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by the way it manages traffic 
and mobility; yet there were no traffic studies done to review what would happen when 
parking rates were increased as proposed. The above cited policy, and any other 
provisions of the certified LCP, does not require a traffic study for parking rate increases. 
Nevertheless, according to the City’s findings, City staff has conducted ongoing parking 
space occupancy assessments based upon data collection during summer months to 
create a baseline that will allow it to address the impact of program updates and adjust 
future rates accordingly since the approval of the 2013 PMP. The City data collection 
statistics from 2013 to 2019 reveal that the City continues to have a higher than optimal 
parking space occupancy rate (over 85 percent) in certain areas, particularly during its 
peak summer season. The City identified that one of the recommendations of the 2013 
PMP is to increase the parking rates to manage parking demand. The City concluded that 
parking rates higher than 85 percent in certain locations are a sign that parking rates are 
not being set at an appropriate amount to manage parking demand, and indicate that the 
City needs to continue to adjust rates accordingly. Therefore, the City was not required to 
conduct a traffic study, and has conducted ongoing parking space occupancy 
assessments to understand parking occupancy rates of its downtown parking meters and 
lots/structures, and incorporated the results in its decision to establish the parking rate 
structure. 

=== p13
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
13 
Another Action item under LUE Goal 1 (calling for the creation of a sustainable community) 
is LUE Action 1.1.6, which states: 
Evaluate and consider eliminating or significantly reducing the cost of parking 
permits for fuel-efficient or alternative-fuel vehicles. 
The appellants cited the above Action 1.1.6. Based on the City’s findings, the parking rates 
will apply to all motorists in a uniform manner, and there is no evaluation or consideration 
of reduced parking rates for fuel-efficient or alternative-fuel vehicles. The City’s record 
contains no evidence that the project would eliminate or significantly reduce the cost of 
parking permits for fuel-efficient or alternative-fuel vehicles. The City’s failure to evaluate 
incentives for alternative fuel vehicles is not consistent with LUE Goal 1 or its intent section 
to “move toward sustainability and a reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.” There are 
no findings or conditions in the approved permit demonstrating consistency with LUE 
Action 1.1.6. When it took action to raise rates to manage parking demand in the 
downtown area and parking lots, the City should have also considered incentives to 
encourage residents and visitors to drive alternative fuel vehicles, consistent with the LUE.  
Therefore, the Commission finds that the appeal does raise a substantial issue with 
respect to the project’s conformance to the LCP policies related to creating a sustainable 
community. 
Appellants’ Argument No. 3: Failure to Consider Impacts on Traffic and Community 
Character. 
1. The appellants contend the City’s approval did not consider Goal 2 of the LUE. 
LUE Goal 2: Preserve, enhance and respect the unique character and identity of 
Laguna’s residential neighborhoods. 
LUE Policy 2.3: 
Preserve and enhance the qualities that contribute to the 
character of the residential community, including quiet neighborhoods, pedestrian 
use of streets, and appropriate levels of illumination and nighttime activity and seek 
to mitigate the effects of high-volume thru-traffic. 
LUE Action 2.3.4: 
Investigate streetscape improvements, street design, and 
regulations that will help reduce the speed and negative impacts of traffic on 
residential streets. 
LUE Action 2.3.5: 
Modify the Corridor Progression Traffic Analysis Model 
thresholds to accurately reflect the unique nature of the City’s residential streets. 
The appellants claim that the parking rate hikes will create adverse impacts to community 
character because parking rate increases will cause people to spill over into residential 
neighborhoods adjacent to popular visitor destinations (such as beaches and the 
downtown area) to look for cheaper parking and park in front of residences, resulting in 
negative impacts on those neighborhoods from the increase in vehicular and foot traffic. 
The appellants mentioned three reasons for the project’s impact on community character: 
1) people will circle residential neighborhoods in search of parking and create more 

=== p14
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
14 
conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles; 2) they will use parking spaces in front of 
private residences that might be more appropriately used by guests of those residences; 
and 3) they will create disturbance as many of them return to their cars late in the evening, 
especially after drinking at local bars and restaurants. As discussed in Appellant’s 
Argument No.1, the proposed parking rate hikes could potentially increase conflicts 
between visitor-serving uses/infrastructure and residents, and as such, this presents at 
issue with respect to that contention. The proposed parking rate increases are intended to 
alleviate the congested downtown parking occupancy rates by encouraging the use of 
peripheral parking lots and free trolleys. The project does not include changes to parking 
management or design in residential neighborhoods, and the potential to create an 
incentive for some additional public parking in residential areas is not a significant change 
to the character of those areas. Therefore, the project, as intended to provide a solution to 
the identified congestion, would maintain the status quo and would not have an impact on 
the community character and identity of Laguna’s residential neighborhoods. The 
appellants argument that the parking rate increases may cause spillover into the 
residential neighborhoods does raise a substantial issue with regard to the previously cited 
LUE policies, but there is no evidence that the parking rate increase will adversely affect 
community character. 
2. The appellants contend the City’s approval did not consider Goal 5 of the LUE. 
 
LUE Goal 5: Promote compatibility among land uses in the community. 
Intent – Laguna Beach has a varied mix of land uses in close proximity to one 
another. For example, residential zones abut commercial and light industrial zones 
and building sites abut sensitive open space, creating the potential for incompatible 
land uses. Spillover parking from commercial areas negatively impacts some 
residential neighborhoods. Pressures to develop larger structures in all areas of the 
City have resulted in negative aesthetic and other impacts upon the community. In 
order to counteract the negative effects and avert future conflicts among land uses, 
the following policies and actions address the need to evaluate and, where 
appropriate, amend zoning standards and consider rezoning areas that are 
incompatible, establish compatibility guidelines for new development and 
subdivisions, and consider the adoption of neighborhood parking programs.  
[Emphasis added] 
 
LUE Policy 5.4: Preserve and maintain the residential character and livability of 
neighborhoods adjacent to commercial districts and/or individual businesses by 
regulating and minimizing impacts from commercial activities, including but not 
necessarily limited to deliveries, amplified music, light trespass, alcohol-related 
impacts, and employee or valet parking. Establishment of any new preferential 
parking districts in the coastal zone shall be prohibited.  [Emphasis added] 
The appellants argue that, although the “intent” portion of this goal specifically mentions 
‘spillover parking’ and the negative impacts to adjacent residential neighborhoods, the City 
did not consider implementing or improving employee or valet parking programs in its 
approval of the parking rate increases and violated LUE Policy 5.4. However, such 

=== p15
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
15 
programs are just one example of what LUE Policy 5.4 suggests as a means of protecting 
the residential character and livability of certain neighborhoods.  Not every new program 
subject to a coastal development permit must implement every element of the LCP. Rather 
it should implement all applicable provisions of the LCP. Furthermore, the project the City 
is proposing is designed to further the same goal that employee and valet parking 
programs are recommended to promote.  Specifically, the parking rate increase is 
designed to encourage the use of peripheral parking and free trolley program, thereby 
alleviating the congested traffic of the City’s downtown area and promoting compatibility 
among land uses in the community. Finally, the City’s decision is not anticipated to 
influence the existing employee or valet parking programs, which do not rely on metered 
public street parking spaces, so there is nothing in the current proposal that necessitates 
consideration of these programs. 
3. The appellants contend the City’s approval did not consider Goal 8 of the LUE. 
LUE Goal 8: Minimize the impact of the automobile on the character of Laguna 
Beach and emphasize a pedestrian-oriented environment, safe sidewalks, 
landscaped buffer zones, and alternate means of transportation. 
The appellants claim that the project would increase traffic circulation caused by cars 
trying to find parking spaces and will not minimize the impact of automobiles on the 
character of Laguna Beach, nor does it provide for funds to be used from the increased 
parking revenues to make safer sidewalks or emphasize a pedestrian-oriented 
environment.  However, the proposed parking rate structure is intended to reduce the 
number of cars trying to find parking in the downtown area, which will contribute to the goal 
listed above (minimizing the impact of the automobile on the character of Laguna Beach 
and emphasizing a pedestrian-oriented environment and alternate means of 
transportation). 
4. The appellants contend the City’s approval did not consider the Technical Appendix. 
The Technical Appendix to the Laguna Beach LCP was developed in 1984 and contains 
studies and findings that center on five principal sections: 1) Recreation and visitor-serving 
facilities and uses, 2) parking and circulation, 3) environmentally sensitive areas, 4) 
shoreline access, and 5) undeveloped lands. Section 3 of the Technical Appendix, which 
concerns the City’s parking and circulation, makes findings for the City’s parking user 
groups and parking constraints/demands. The appellants assert that the Technical 
Appendix’s facts and figures are outdated, and that the City’s current approval of the 
parking rate structure made no reference to the appendix nor contained a study of what 
effects these rate hikes will have on parking in South Laguna, specifically, where many of 
the streets are held privately and do not provide parking for beachgoers. It is true that the 
Technical Appendix is outdated and is not directly relevant to the proposed project, 
especially because the City conducted a more updated parking study as grounds for the 
specific parking rate increases. The annual updates of the City’s 2013 PMP have tracked 
parking occupancy of the downtown and Laguna Canyon Road parking spaces (Exhibit 4), 
and the City’s approval has adequately referenced the results as justification for rate 
increases. The Technical Appendix references parking inventory generally and does not 
set parking rates. The appellants further contend that, although parking rate increases may 

=== p16
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
16 
have been justified in the downtown and Laguna Canyon parking areas with the City’s 
parking occupancy analysis (Exhibit 4), the same cannot be said for the metered lots in 
North and South Laguna, because the City’s study does not reference any occupancy 
rates in those areas. The certified LCP does not require traffic study findings in order to 
raise parking rates, and the City drew its conclusion with all available parking occupancy 
data. 
 
5. The appellants raise concerns about the cumulative effects of the loss of parking spaces 
that have already occurred and additional loss as contemplated by the about-to-be 
adopted “Downtown Action Plan.” 
 
The loss of parking spaces that occurred in the past and the City’s “Downtown Action Plan” 
are not the subject of this appeal. 
 
Therefore, the Commission finds that the appeal does not raise a substantial issue with 
respect to the project’s consistency with the referenced LCP policies related to traffic and 
community character. 
Appellants’ Argument No. 4: Lack of Proactive Participation in Planning Activities of 
Regional and Adjacent Jurisdictions. 
The appellants contend that the City’s approval did not consider Goal 11 of the LUE. 
LUE Goal 11: Proactively participate in the planning activities of regional and 
adjacent jurisdictions.  
LUE Policy 11.3: 
Work with adjacent jurisdictions to resolve regionally based 
problems such as water quality, runoff and flooding, air space, and 
transportation/traffic congestion issues and to establish regional responses to open-
space conservation and wilderness area access. 
The appellants contend there is no evidence in the record that the City has worked with 
adjacent jurisdictions to resolve transportation/traffic congestion issues related to the 
proposed increase in parking rates. The appellants further contend that there is nothing in 
the record to reflect any efforts to work with those other jurisdictions to reduce the City’s 
traffic and parking problems, nor has the City reviewed its parking rates as compared to 
nearby areas. In fact, the City’s implementation of its peripheral parking program and free 
trolley service did include some collaboration with adjacent jurisdictions. Specifically, the 
City provides free parking during the summer months at its Summer Breeze lot, which is 
located in the City of Irvine, and provides free trolleys alternating from the site to the City’s 
beaches and downtown. City staff provided evidence as part of the City’s record that it did 
compare its existing and proposed rates to cities of Newport Beach, Huntington Beach, 
Santa Monica, Manhattan Beach, and downtowns of cities of San Francisco, Los Angeles 
and San Diego (Exhibit 5). The City staff further clarified that they specifically selected 
these cities because of the comparable number of these cities’ yearly visitors (more than 2 
million visitors).  

=== p17
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
17 
The City’s record for the subject CDP does not include “proactive” participation in the 
planning activities of regional and adjacent jurisdictions, because the City did not 
collaborate or work with adjacent jurisdictions to resolve regional problems related to 
parking and traffic through the subject CDP process. The City implemented the free 
Summer Breeze parking lot in Irvine as a component of its Parking Management Program, 
but has not worked with adjacent jurisdictions to provide additional alternatives or a 
coordinated regional parking rate structure in order to resolve the identified 
transportation/traffic congestion issue. However, the above cited goal and policy do not 
provide the timing of such collaboration in regards to specific planning activities. Not every 
new program subject to a coastal development permit must implement every element of 
the LCP. Therefore, the Commission finds that the appeal does not raise a substantial 
issue with respect to the project’s consistency with the participation in planning activities of 
regional and adjacent jurisdictions as defined by the certified LCP. 
Appellants’ Argument No. 5: Lack of Conformity with the General Plan 
The Transportation, Circulation and Growth Management Element of the General Plan 
states, in part: 
1A: Continue to investigate new techniques which promote the balancing of 
principles that roads are not just for cars; that residents have a right to the best 
quality of life which include the least noise possible, the least pollution possible, the 
safest environment possible and an environment which fosters a rich community life. 
2D: Monitor the activities of adjoining jurisdictions to determine the impacts 
proposed development will have on traffic flow in Laguna Beach. Work with adjacent 
cities to ensure that the traffic resulting from development projects in these cities 
does not adversely impact the City of Laguna Beach. Actively oppose the creation 
of new arterials linking surrounding communities with Laguna Beach. 
3B: Encourage street design and traffic levels that are sympathetic to the health, 
safety and social needs of individual neighborhoods. 
3C: Compile updated level of traffic data utilizing traffic models developed 
specifically for the City of Laguna Beach residential neighborhood environment. 
4B: Establish level of traffic thresholds and appropriate mitigation measures for 
neighborhood streets. 
4D Develop a traffic impact mitigation program for transportation improvements 
within the City's boundaries. 
6B Review the City's Parking Ordinance regularly to determine if requirements 
respond appropriately to parking demand, while balancing other General Plan 
objectives. 
6D: Develop a program for directional signs to assist motorists in locating parking. 
6G: To enhance and increase public access, pursue funding for planning and 

=== p18
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
18 
development of a peripheral parking program for parking, increased access to the 
beaches and transit opportunities. Specifically, study the Pacific Coast Highway 
corridor, Laguna Canyon Road, El Moro School and the downtown area for parking 
and transit opportunities, including appropriate locations for parking structures. 
6I: Continue to manage and enforce a comprehensive parking program for the 
summer festival season. 
6J: Consider allocating funds for traffic and circulation improvements in connection 
with the annual Capital Improvement Program. 
6L: Coordinate the peripheral parking program with the provision of frequent tram 
service to and from the CBD. 
6M: Investigate the feasibility of a parking mitigation fee program as part of a 
comprehensive parking management plan to be imposed on businesses located in 
the CBD. Ensure that proceeds from the program are used to construct peripheral 
parking structures and connecting tram service. 
8A Maximize the efficiency of the circulation system through the use of 
transportation system management and demand management strategies. 
The appellants note that the City’s certified LCP requires the approval authority to make a 
finding that the project is “in conformity with all the applicable provisions of the general plan, 
including the certified local coastal program and any applicable specific plans” (LBMC 
25.07.012(G)). The appellants contend that the City’s approval did not follow the 
Transportation, Circulation and Growth Management Element (“TCGME”) of its General 
Plan due to its lack of adequate traffic impact study. The appellants invoke 10 policies of 
the TCGME (1A, 2D, 3B, 3C, 4B, 4D, 6B, 6G, 6M, 8A), but none of them requires a traffic 
impact study for the City to adjust citywide parking rates. In addition, the City’s finding 
states the project’s conformance with policies 6D, 6G, 6I, 6J, and 6L by enhancing coastal 
access with provision of free trolleys, use of peripheral parking lots, free parking, 
wayfinding signage, and other accomplishments outlined in the City’s PMP Update Report. 
Therefore, the Commission finds the appeal does not raise a substantial issue with respect 
to the project’s conformance with the Laguna Beach General Plan.  
Appellants’ Argument No. 6: Public Access and Environmental Justice 
The appellants assert that the City’s action did not adequately maximize public access to 
and along the coast, nor did it consider Environmental Justice in its approval of the parking 
rate increases, and that the City could and should have conditioned the project to ensure 
that the lower cost parking areas, a key component of the peripheral parking program, are 
advertised in languages other than English and in publications circulated outside of the 
Coastal Zone. The City-approved parking rate structure applies to all public meters and 
lots/structures citywide, thus bearing a potential to impact public access to and along the 
coast of Laguna Beach. Particularly, the said parking rate structure allows for the increase 

=== p19
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
19 
in parking rates indefinitely, with the only limitation being that the rate increases will not 
exceed 50% in any rolling three-year period. 
While there may not be a direct relationship between vehicle parking and public access, 
and the City of Laguna Beach provides alternative means of accessing the coast (e.g. the 
trolley), incremental annual increases of parking rates in the coastal zone remain a 
concern of the Commission. The indefinite approval of parking rate increases along the 
coastline, up to 25% per year, as approved by the City’s permit, could ultimately 
discourage members of the public from accessing the coast. The open endedness of the 
City’s action, with future rate increases not subject to Coastal Commission review, makes 
the action inconsistent with the public access policies of the Coastal Act, which are part of 
the standard of review for the portions of the project in the appealable area of the coastal 
zone. 
Section 30210 of the Coastal Act states: 
In carrying out the requirement of Section 4 of Article X of the California 
Constitution, maximum access, which shall be conspicuously posted, and 
recreational opportunities shall be provided for all the people consistent with public 
safety needs and the need to protect public rights, rights of private property owners, 
and natural resource areas from overuse. 
Section 30211 of the Coastal Act states: 
Development shall not interfere with the public's right of access to the sea where 
acquired through use or legislative authorization, including, but not limited to, the 
use of dry sand and rocky coastal beaches to the first line of terrestrial vegetation. 
Section 30212 of the Coastal Act states, in part: 
(a) Public access from the nearest public roadway to the shoreline and along the 
coast shall be provided in new development projects except where: (1) It is 
inconsistent with public safety, military security needs, or the protection of fragile 
coastal resources, (2) Adequate access exists nearby, or, (3) Agriculture would be 
adversely affected. Dedicated accessway shall not be required to be opened to 
public use until a public agency or private association agrees to accept 
responsibility for maintenance and liability of the accessway. 
Section 30212.5 of the Coastal Act states: 
Wherever appropriate and feasible, public facilities, including parking areas or 
facilities, shall be distributed throughout an area so as to mitigate against the 
impacts, social and otherwise, of overcrowding or overuse by the public of any 
single area. 
Section 30213 of the Coastal Act states, in part: 

=== p20
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
20 
Lower cost visitor and recreational facilities shall be protected, encouraged, and, 
where feasible, provided. Developments providing public recreational opportunities 
are preferred… 
Section 30214 of the Coastal Act states: 
(a) The public access policies of this article shall be implemented in a manner that 
takes into account the need to regulate the time, place, and manner of public 
access depending on the facts and circumstances in each case including, but not 
limited to, the following: 
(1) Topographic and geologic site characteristics. 
(2) The capacity of the site to sustain use and at what level of intensity. 
(3) The appropriateness of limiting public access to the right to pass and repass 
depending on such factors as the fragility of the natural resources in the area and 
the proximity of the access area to adjacent residential uses. 
(4) The need to provide for the management of access areas so as to protect the 
privacy of adjacent property owners and to protect the aesthetic values of the area 
by providing for the collection of litter. 
(b) It is the intent of the Legislature that the public access policies of this article be 
carried out in a reasonable manner that considers the equities and that balances 
the rights of the individual property owner with the public's constitutional right of 
access pursuant to Section 4 of Article X of the California Constitution. Nothing in 
this section or any amendment thereto shall be construed as a limitation on the 
rights guaranteed to the public under Section 4 of Article X of the California 
Constitution. 
(c) In carrying out the public access policies of this article, the commission and any 
other responsible public agency shall consider and encourage the utilization of 
innovative access management techniques, including, but not limited to, 
agreements with private organizations which would minimize management costs 
and encourage the use of volunteer programs. 
Additionally, the Commission must consider the public access policies of the Coastal Act 
through an environmental justice lens, consistent with Coastal Act Sections 30013 and 
30604, and consistent with the Commission’s Environmental Justice Policy. 
Section 30013 of the Coastal Act states: 
The Legislature further finds and declares that in order to advance the principles of 
environmental justice and equality, subdivision (a) of Section 11135 of the 
Government Code and subdivision (e) of Section 65040.12 of the Government 
Code apply to the commission and all public agencies implementing the provisions 
of this division. As required by Section 11135 of the Government Code, no person 
in the State of California, on the basis of race, national origin, ethnic group 
identification, religion, age, sex, sexual orientation, color, genetic information, or 
disability, shall be unlawfully denied full and equal access to the benefits of, or be 
unlawfully subjected to discrimination, under any program or activity that is 
conducted, operated, or administered pursuant to this division, is funded directly by 

=== p21
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
21 
the state for purposes of this division, or receives any financial assistance from the 
state pursuant to this division. 
Section 30604 of the Coastal Act states, in relevant part: 
(h) When acting on a coastal development permit, the issuing agency, or the 
commission on appeal, may consider environmental justice, or the equitable 
distribution of environmental benefits throughout the state. 
The California Coastal Commission’s Environmental Justice Policy states: 
“The California Coastal Commission’s commitment to diversity, equality and 
environmental justice recognizes that equity is at the heart of the Coastal Act, a law 
designed to empower the public’s full participation in the land-use decision-making 
process that protects California’s coast and ocean commons for the benefit of all the 
people. In keeping with that visionary mandate, but recognizing that the agency has 
not always achieved this mission with respect to many marginalized communities 
throughout California’s history, the Commission as an agency is committed to 
protecting coastal natural resources and providing public access and lower-cost 
recreation opportunities for everyone. The agency is committed to ensuring that 
those opportunities not be denied on the basis of background, culture, race, color, 
religion, national origin, income, ethnic group, age, disability status, sexual 
orientation, or gender identity.  
The Commission will use its legal authority to ensure equitable access to clean, 
healthy, and accessible coastal environments for communities that have been 
disproportionately overburdened by pollution or with natural resources that have 
been subjected to permanent damage for the benefit of wealthier communities. 
Coastal development should be inclusive for all who work, live, and recreate on 
California’s coast and provide equitable benefits for communities that have 
historically been excluded, marginalized, or harmed by coastal development.  
The Commission recognizes that all aspects of our mission are best advanced with 
the participation and leadership of people from diverse backgrounds, cultures, races, 
color, religions, national origin, ethnic groups, ages, income levels disability status, 
sexual orientation, and gender identity. The Commission is committed to 
compliance and enforcement of Government Code Section 11135, as well as 
consideration of environmental justice principles as defined in Government Code 
Section 65040.12, consistent with Coastal Act policies, during the planning, 
decision-making, and implementation of Commission actions, programs, policies, 
and activities. It is also the California Coastal Commission’s goal, consistent with 
Public Resources Code Section 300137 and Government Code Section 11135, to 
recruit, build, and maintain a highly qualified, professional staff that reflects our 
state’s diversity. Further, the Commission is committed to compliance with Title VI 
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and its regulations.” 
Throughout California’s history, low-income communities, communities of color, and other 
marginalized populations (altogether referred to as underserved communities in this staff 

=== p22
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
22 
report) have faced uneven barriers to accessing the California coastline because of 
geographic, socioeconomic, and cultural reasons. Recognizing this historical injustice and 
how it is inconsistent with Coastal Act policies ensuring maximum and equitable public 
access to the California coastline, the Commission adopted its Environmental Justice 
Policy in March 2019 to promote the consideration of environmental justice principles in 
the agency’s decision-making process. 
The City’s approval of a project that allows for the increase of parking rates indefinitely has 
the potential to disproportionately impact members of the underserved communities, who 
have less disposable income (both in raw numbers and as a percentage of their income 
and assets) and fewer options for enjoying public access to and recreation on the coast. 
The parking rates in downtown Laguna Beach are already relatively high (up to $5 per 
hour) by regional comparison – and the project would allow the rates to increase 
indefinitely (up to 50% over a rolling three year period). While some rate increases are 
necessary to encourage turnover and encourage alternative modes of transportation, the 
cumulative impacts of the project could disproportionally impact members of underserved 
communities who would be discouraged from accessing the coast. The City provides 
free/lower cost peripheral parking spaces and a free trolley program, but these parking 
management programs have not been widely advertised to underserved communities or 
made accessible in languages other than English.  
Therefore, the City’s mitigation measures for the increased parking rates are not sufficient 
to alleviate the disproportionate impact on members of the underserved communities. The 
Commission finds that the appeal does raise a substantial issue with respect to the 
project’s conformance to the public access and environmental justice policies of the 
Coastal Act. 
 
 

=== p23
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
23 
Summary of Conclusions Regarding Appellants’ Contentions 
Contention 
Number 
General Contention 
Specific Contention 
Conclusion 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
Failure to Protect the 
City’s Coastal and 
Other Natural 
Resources 
Violation of Goal 4 in failing to direct 
funds to a fair-share impact fee 
No substantial 
issue 
Violation of LUE Policy 4.2 by failing 
to address conflicts with residents 
Substantial issue 
Violation of LUE Action 4.2.5 by failing 
to require a CDP for implementation of 
peripheral parking program 
No substantial 
issue 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Failure to Create a 
Sustainable 
Community 
Failure to perform a traffic study as 
required by LUE Goal 1  
No substantial 
issue 
Failure to consider different rate 
structures for fuel-efficient or 
alternative-fuel vehicles as required by 
Violation of LUE Action 1.1.6  
Substantial issue 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Failure to Consider 
Impacts on Traffic 
and Community 
Character 
Violation of LUE Goal 2 by failing to 
preserve community character 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No substantial 
issue 
 
Violation of LUE Goal 5 by failing to 
consider implementing employee or 
valet parking programs 
Violation of LUE Goal 8 by failing to 
minimize the impact of automobiles on 
the character of Laguna Beach 
Failure to consider the Technical 
Appendix to the LCP 
Failure to consider the loss of parking 
spaces in the past and future loss 
expected by the City’s “Downtown 
Action Plan” 
 
 
4 
Lack of Proactive 
Participation in 
Planning Activities of 
Regional and 
Adjacent 
Jurisdictions 
 
 
Violation of LUE Goal 11 by failing to 
work with adjacent jurisdictions 
 
 
No substantial 
issue 
5 
Lack of Conformity 
with the GP 
Failure to follow the TCGME of its GP 
No substantial 
issue 
 
6 
Public Access and 
Environmental 
Justice 
Failure to maximize public access to 
the coast, and failure to consider 
Environmental Justice in its approval of 
the project 
Substantial issue 

=== p24
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
24 
SUBSTANTIAL ISSUE FACTORS: 
The Commission typically applies five factors in making a determination whether an appeal 
raises a substantial issue pursuant to Section 30625(b)(2). 
1. The degree of factual and legal support for the local government’s decision that 
the development is consistent with the certified LCP. 
The City did not adequately support its determination of the project’s consistency with all of 
the applicable policies of the certified LCP and the public access provisions of the Coastal 
Act.  Specifically, the City’s action lacked support with respect to the following: (1) The 
City’s approval did not consider LUE Policy 4.2, which calls for policies to reduce conflicts 
between visitor-serving uses/infrastructure and residents, (2) the City’s approval did not 
consider LUE Action 1.1.6, which requires the City to consider eliminating or significantly 
reducing cost of parking permits for fuel efficient or alternative fuel vehicles; and (3) the 
approval’s indefinite term of parking rate increase authorization did not consider the public 
access and environmental justice policies of the Coastal Act. Therefore, this factor 
supports a substantial issue finding. 
2. The extent and scope of the development as approved or denied by the local 
government. 
The City-approved CDP will result in an immediate increase of parking rates in all public 
meters and lots/structures located citywide. Therefore, the Commission finds that the 
extent and scope of the development as approved by the local government is substantial. 
This factor supports a finding of substantial issue. 
3. The significance of the coastal resources affected by the decision.  
The City-approved CDP will affect the parking rates along the coastline of Laguna Beach. 
Therefore this project will affect public access and recreational opportunities to the coast in the 
City of Laguna Beach. Public access and recreational opportunities are among the Coastal 
Act’s highest priorities, and Laguna Beach is visited by millions of visitors each year, many by 
private vehicles. Therefore, this factor supports a finding of substantial issue. 
4. The precedential value of the local government’s decision for future 
interpretations of its LCP.  
The City-approved CDP would authorize future increases to the City’s public parking meters 
and lots/structures in perpetuity. In other words, the City would not need to process any 
future CDPs related to the City’s public parking after the subject CDP. Thus, the City’s 
decision would not have a precedential value for future interpretations of its LCP. This factor 
does not support a finding of substantial issue. 
5. Whether the appeal raises local issues, or those of regional or statewide 
significance. 
The appeal raises issues of statewide significance, given that the City-approved parking rate 
structure without a term of authorization may set a precedent for other coastal jurisdictions to 
follow. Managing parking along California’s coastline is related to maximizing public access 
and recreational opportunities pursuant to the Costal Act, so the indefinite authorization of 
parking rate increase by the local government raises issues of statewide significance. 
Therefore, this factor supports a finding of substantial issue. 

=== p25
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
25 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, staff recommends that the Commission find that a substantial issue exists 
with respect to whether the local government action conforms with the policies of the City’s 
certified LCP and the public access and environmental justice policies of the Coastal Act. 
 
 

=== p26
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
26 
VI.  MOTION AND RESOLUTION – DE NOVO REVIEW 
Motion: 
I move that the Commission approve Coastal Development Permit 
No. A-5-LGB-20-0001 pursuant to the staff recommendation. 
Staff recommends a YES vote.  Passage of this motion will result in approval of the permit 
as conditioned and adoption of the following resolution and findings. The motion passes only 
by affirmative vote of a majority of the Commissioners present. 
Resolution: 
The Commission hereby approves Coastal Development Permit Application No. 
A-5-LGB-20-0001 and adopts the findings set forth below on grounds that the 
development, as conditioned, will be in conformity with the Certified Local 
Coastal Plan and the public access and recreation policies of Chapter 3 of the 
Coastal Act.  Approval of the permit complies with the California Environmental 
Quality Act because either 1) feasible mitigation measures and/or alternatives 
have been incorporated to substantially lessen any significant adverse effects of 
the development on the environment, or 2) there are no further feasible 
mitigation measures or alternatives that will substantially lessen any significant 
adverse impacts of the development on the environment. 
VII.  STANDARD CONDITIONS 
This permit is granted subject to the following standard conditions:  
1.  
Notice of Receipt and Acknowledgment. The permit is not valid and development 
shall not commence until a copy of the permit, signed by the permittees or authorized 
agent, acknowledging receipt of the permit and acceptance of the terms and conditions, 
is returned to the Commission office. 
2.  
Expiration. If development has not commenced, the permit will expire two years from 
the date on which the Commission voted on the application. Development shall be 
pursued in a diligent manner and completed in a reasonable period of time. Application 
for extension of the permit must be made prior to the expiration date. 
3.  
Interpretation. Any questions of intent of interpretation of any condition will be 
resolved by the Executive Director or the Commission. 
4.  
Assignment. The permit may be assigned to any qualified person, provided assignee 
files with the Commission an affidavit accepting all terms and conditions of the permit. 
5.  
Terms and Conditions Run with the Land. These terms and conditions shall be 
perpetual, and it is the intention of the Commission and the permittees to bind all future 
owners and possessors of the subject property to the terms and conditions. 

=== p27
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
27 
VIII. SPECIAL CONDITIONS 
This permit is granted subject to the following special conditions: 
1. Term of Parking Rate Authorization.  This Coastal Development Permit only 
authorizes increases in parking rates for three calendar years (no new parking rate 
increases are authorized after December 31, 2022).  The City shall comply with the 
following requirements for that term of parking rate increase authorization: 
A. The year 2020 parking rates may be implemented up to the maximum rate in the 
table identified in Exhibit 2 of this staff report. The City shall report the 2020 rates 
to the Commission’s Executive Director prior to implementation. 
B. The 2021 parking rates may be set at a level up to, but not more than, 10% higher 
than the 2020 parking rates, and shall be reported to the Commission’s Executive 
Director prior to implementation. 
C. The 2022 parking rates may be set at a level up to, but not more than, 10% higher 
than the 2021 parking rates, and shall be reported to the Commission’s Executive 
Director prior to implementation. 
D. If the City seeks to increase parking rates in 2023 or at any time again in the 
future, a new local CDP authorizing such a change must be processed, approved, 
and not overturned on appeal or otherwise, in order for the proposed future 
parking rate increase to be effective. If the Commission overturns the decision on 
appeal and requires a modification in parking rates, the modified parking rates will 
be effective even if they do not satisfy the requirements set forth in this condition. 
 
All development must occur in strict compliance with the proposal as set forth in the 
application for permit, subject to any special conditions. Any deviation from the approved 
project must be submitted for review by the Executive Director to determine whether an 
amendment to this coastal development permit or a new coastal development permit is 
required. 
 
2. Additional Language Accessibility Program. Within 30 days of issuance of this permit, 
the City shall implement the additional language accessibility program for the purpose of 
advertising its peripheral parking and free trolley program in languages other than 
English. The additional language accessibility program shall comply with the following 
requirements: 
A. The program shall translate the City’s peripheral parking and free trolley 
information on its website to languages other than English including, but not 
limited to, Spanish. 
B. The program shall translate the information on all printed materials related to the 
peripheral parking and free trolley programs to languages other than English 
including, but not limited to, Spanish. 
C. If the City determines it to be feasible, the information on the City’s mobile parking 
app and the Trolley Tracker app shall be translated to languages other than 
English including, but not limited to, Spanish. 
 
3. Incentives for Sustainability and Fuel-Efficient or Alternative-Fuel Vehicles. Within 
30 days of issuance of this permit, the City shall evaluate and consider reducing the cost 

=== p28
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
28 
of hourly parking rates for the parking spaces adjacent to its electric vehicle charging 
stations located in the City’s parking lots and/or structures. The City shall also consider 
other incentives for fuel-efficient or alternative fuel vehicles that can be implemented 
concurrent with its parking management plan. No later than December 31, 2020, the City 
shall provide the Commission’s Executive Director a report on its implementation of LUE 
Goal 1 (Sustainability) and LUE Action 1.1.6 (Fuel Efficient and Alternative Fuel Vehicle 
Incentives), which may also include programs and incentives the City is already 
implementing (e.g. increased operations of the free trolley and incentives to encourage 
cycling and walking instead of driving). 
IX. 
FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS – DE NOVO 
Note: The Findings and Declarations in the Substantial Issue section of this staff report are hereby 
adopted by reference into the Findings and Declarations for the De Novo Permit. 
A. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
The City-approved project is described as the establishment of a multi-year, multi-
phase parking rate structure for all public parking meters and lots/structures located 
citywide for summer and non-summer months as outlined in Attachment A of City 
Resolution No. 19-5154 (Exhibit 2). However, since the filing of the appeal of local 
CDP No. 19-5154, the City has agreed to modify its proposal to better conform to the 
provisions of the certified LCP and the Coastal Act. Specifically, the modifications are 
summarized as follows: 
• The City will limit the term of parking rate increase authorization to the end of 
2022. If the City seeks an increase in the parking rates after that date, it will 
need to process a new local CDP, which may be appealed to the Coastal 
Commission.  
• The City will implement the proposed parking rate for year 2020, but it will limit 
the subsequent two years’ increases to a maximum of ten (10) percent of 
each previous year’s parking rates. 
• The City will implement the additional language accessibility program on its 
website, as well as on all printed materials related to the parking and trolley 
programs, and if feasible, on the City’s mobile parking app and the Trolley 
Tracker app. 
• The City will evaluate and consider reducing the cost of hourly parking rates 
for parking spaces adjacent to its electric vehicle charging stations located in 
the City’s parking lots and/or structures. The City will also continue and 
expand programs and incentives that encourage sustainability and offer 
alternatives to driving and parking (e.g. increased operations of the free trolley 
and incentives to encourage cycling and walking instead of driving). 
B. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
Section 30604(b) of the Coastal Act states: 

=== p29
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
29 
After certification of the local coastal program, a coastal development permit shall 
be issued if the issuing agency or the commission on appeal finds that the proposed 
development is in conformity with the certified local coastal program. 
In addition, Section 30604(c) of the Coastal Act states: 
Every coastal development permit issued for any development between the nearest 
public road and the sea or the shoreline of any body of water located within the 
coastal zone shall include a specific finding that the development is in conformity 
with the public access and public recreation policies of Chapter 3 (commencing with 
Section 30200). 
The project will be implemented citywide on public streets and public and private parking 
lots in Laguna Beach, with some of the public parking areas located between the sea and 
the first public road paralleling the sea. Therefore, the standards of review for this project 
are the City’s certified LCP and the public access and public recreation policies of the 
Coastal Act. The City of Laguna Beach Local Coastal Program was certified by the 
Commission on January 13, 1993 (except for the areas of deferred certification: Three 
Arch Bay, Hobo Canyon, and Irvine Cove). The subject site falls within the City’s certified 
LCP jurisdiction. The City’s LCP Land Use Plan portion is comprised of a variety of 
planning documents including the Land Use Element (LUE), Open Space/Conservation 
Element (OSC), and the Coastal Technical Appendix. The Implementation Plan portion of 
the LCP is comprised of a number of documents including Title 25 Zoning. 
C. Public Access  
In order to maximize public access, the City’s certified LCP includes the following policies: 
Land Use Element: 
Policy 4.2: Promote policies to accommodate visitors, reduce conflicts between visitor-
serving uses/infrastructure and residents, and reduce impacts on the City's natural 
resources. 
Policy 4.3: Maintain and enhance access to coastal resource areas, particularly the 
designated public beaches, by ensuring that access points are safe, attractive, and 
pedestrian friendly. 
Coastal Land Use Plan Technical Appendix:  
The location and amount of new development shall maintain and enhance public 
access to the coast by providing adequate parking facilities or providing substitute 
means of serving the development with public transportation. 
Open Space/Conservation Element:  
Policy 3-A: Retain and improve existing public beach accessways in the City, and 
protect and enhance the public rights to use the dry sand beaches of the City. 

=== p30
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
30 
Also, projects located between the sea and the first public road paralleling the sea, such as 
the subject site, must be consistent with the public access and recreation policies of the 
Coastal Act. 
Section 30210 of the Coastal Act:   
In carrying out the requirement of Section 4 of Article X of the California Constitution, 
maximum access, which shall be conspicuously posted, and recreational opportunities 
shall be provided for all the people consistent with public safety needs and the need to 
protect public rights, rights of private property owners, and natural resource areas from 
overuse. 
The City-approved parking rate structure applies to all public meters and lots/structures 
citywide, thus potentially impacting public access to and along the coast of Laguna Beach 
by making access prohibitively expensive for some. However, as required by Special 
Condition 1, the City has agreed to limit its parking rate increases to a maximum of 10% 
for the years 2021 and 2022, and agreed to process a new local CDP, which will be 
appealable to the Coastal Commission, for any future parking rate increase effective after 
December 31, 2022. Even as so limited, the proposed parking rate increase in 2020 and 
the subsequent two years’ maximum 10% rate increase will discourage some people from 
driving their vehicles and parking in the most expensive areas subject to the parking rate 
increases; however, this is the intent of the program, which overall, is designed to improve 
access. The City’s parking rate structure is a component of the implementation strategy for 
its peripheral parking and free trolley program, which provides an alternative to parking in 
the busy downtown parking area. People who want to pay less to access the coast and the 
downtown may park in the peripheral parking lots and take the free trolleys (which are 
funded by the City’s parking revenue) to the downtown area, Main Beach, and most of the 
City’s other popular beaches.  
The Commission also found that the City’s proposed rate increases could increase 
conflicts between visitor-serving uses/infrastructure and residents, by creating an 
incentive for visitors to downtown and the coast to park in residential neighborhoods, 
particularly if the parking fees increase at the high rates proposed by the City over the 
next three years and continue to increase indefinitely, and if additional parking 
alternatives are not provided. LUE Policy 4.2 requires development to “promote policies 
to accommodate visitors, reduce conflicts between visitor-serving uses/infrastructure and 
residents, and reduce impacts on the City's natural resources.” The three-year 
authorization of rate increases will ensure that the City, the Commission, and the public 
have an opportunity to evaluate the effects of the rate increases and associated 
transportation alternatives. The City will continue to track parking usage data, with the goal 
of reaching the 85% parking occupancy rate that reduces motorist circling and congestion. 
If future rate increases are necessary to achieve the 85% occupancy rate, they will be 
analyzed in combination with other incentives to encourage parking away from the busiest 
areas, including expansion of alternative modes of transport and other sustainability 
implementation strategies required by Special Condition 3. The three-year authorization 
will also avoid impacts which could occur as a result of perpetual, incremental, and annual 
increases of parking rates in the coastal zone, which remain a concern of the Commission. 

=== p31
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
31 
Special Condition 2 requires the City to implement the additional language accessibility 
program for the purpose of advertising its peripheral parking and free trolley program in 
languages other than English. Consequently, members of the public who read in 
languages other than English will be able to more readily utilize the peripheral parking and 
trolley program. This will help individuals whose primary language is not English 
understand their options – and it will help the City’s Parking Management Program as a 
whole by fully including more users. 
Moreover, the intent of the City-approved program enhances public access to the coast 
and complies with the above policies. The Coastal Land Use Plan Technical Appendix 
requires that development maintain and enhance public access to the coast by providing 
adequate parking facilities, and the Open Space/Conservation Element of the certified LCP 
requires protection and enhancement of public rights to use the dry sandy beaches of the 
City. The peripheral parking program and the free trolley program, which are directly linked 
with the subject proposal to implement the overall intent of the City’s PMP, added the 
peripheral parking lots as new parking facilities and provided a connection between them 
and the downtown area and public beach access points. Land Use Element Policy 4.3 
requires the City to maintain and enhance access to coastal resource areas, particularly 
the designated public beaches, which the City proposes to do through its continued 
implementation of the trolley program and expanded summer parking lots (some of which 
are leased from private institutions to provide extra parking specifically for beachgoers). 
The trolley program and expanded summer parking lots are paid for with revenue from the 
parking meters and public parking lots/structures.  
Thus, the program, as a whole, and as conditioned by the Commission, is consistent with 
the LCP public access policies cited above and with the public access and recreation 
policies of the Coastal Act. 
D. Environmental Justice 
The City’s LCP does not contain policies specific to environmental justice. However, the 
Commission must consider the public access policies of the Coastal Act through an 
environmental justice lens, consistent with Coastal Act Sections 30013 and 30604, and 
consistent with the Commission’s Environmental Justice Policy. 
Section 30013 of the Coastal Act states: 
The Legislature further finds and declares that in order to advance the principles of 
environmental justice and equality, subdivision (a) of Section 11135 of the 
Government Code and subdivision (e) of Section 65040.12 of the Government 
Code apply to the commission and all public agencies implementing the provisions 
of this division. As required by Section 11135 of the Government Code, no person 
in the State of California, on the basis of race, national origin, ethnic group 
identification, religion, age, sex, sexual orientation, color, genetic information, or 
disability, shall be unlawfully denied full and equal access to the benefits of, or be 
unlawfully subjected to discrimination, under any program or activity that is 
conducted, operated, or administered pursuant to this division, is funded directly by 
the state for purposes of this division, or receives any financial assistance from the 
state pursuant to this division. 

=== p32
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
32 
Section 30604 of the Coastal Act states, in relevant part: 
(h) When acting on a coastal development permit, the issuing agency, or the 
commission on appeal, may consider environmental justice, or the equitable 
distribution of environmental benefits throughout the state. 
The California Coastal Commission’s Environmental Justice Policy states: 
“The California Coastal Commission’s commitment to diversity, equality and 
environmental justice recognizes that equity is at the heart of the Coastal Act, a law 
designed to empower the public’s full participation in the land-use decision-making 
process that protects California’s coast and ocean commons for the benefit of all the 
people. In keeping with that visionary mandate, but recognizing that the agency has 
not always achieved this mission with respect to many marginalized communities 
throughout California’s history, the Commission as an agency is committed to 
protecting coastal natural resources and providing public access and lower-cost 
recreation opportunities for everyone. The agency is committed to ensuring that 
those opportunities not be denied on the basis of background, culture, race, color, 
religion, national origin, income, ethnic group, age, disability status, sexual 
orientation, or gender identity.  
“The Commission will use its legal authority to ensure equitable access to clean, 
healthy, and accessible coastal environments for communities that have been 
disproportionately overburdened by pollution or with natural resources that have 
been subjected to permanent damage for the benefit of wealthier communities. 
Coastal development should be inclusive for all who work, live, and recreate on 
California’s coast and provide equitable benefits for communities that have 
historically been excluded, marginalized, or harmed by coastal development.  
“The Commission recognizes that all aspects of our mission are best advanced with 
the participation and leadership of people from diverse backgrounds, cultures, races, 
color, religions, national origin, ethnic groups, ages, income levels disability status, 
sexual orientation, and gender identity. The Commission is committed to 
compliance and enforcement of Government Code Section 11135, as well as 
consideration of environmental justice principles as defined in Government Code 
Section 65040.12, consistent with Coastal Act policies, during the planning, 
decision-making, and implementation of Commission actions, programs, policies, 
and activities. It is also the California Coastal Commission’s goal, consistent with 
Public Resources Code Section 300137 and Government Code Section 11135, to 
recruit, build, and maintain a highly qualified, professional staff that reflects our 
state’s diversity. Further, the Commission is committed to compliance with Title VI 
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and its regulations.” 
As discussed previously, the City-approved project would have allowed for the indefinite 
increase of parking rates which would have the potential to disproportionately impact 
members of underserved communities. Therefore, the Commission imposes Special 

=== p33
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
33 
Condition 1, limiting the City’s authority to increase parking rates to a three year period, 
subject to a maximum of 10% in years two and three.  
Additionally, the City has provided free/lower cost peripheral parking spaces and a free 
trolley program, but these parking management programs have not been widely advertised 
to underserved communities or made accessible in languages other than English. Special 
Condition 2 requires that, within 30 days of issuance of this permit, the City shall 
implement the additional language accessibility program by making information on its 
website, as well as in any printed materials related to the parking and trolley programs, 
available in other languages, and if feasible, doing the same with the information on the 
City’s mobile parking app and the Trolley Tracker app. Consequently, some members of 
the underserved communities should be more aware of the peripheral parking and free 
trolley programs and more likely to be able to access them in the same manner as the 
general members of the public. 
Any identified impacts to underserved communities that occur despite the requirements of 
Special Conditions 1 and 2 should be addressed through immediate City action to 
maximize public access for all people. If impacts persist beyond the three year 
authorization of the CDP, and the City seeks future parking rate increases or other 
changes to its Parking Management Program that require a CDP, then the City (or the 
Coastal Commission on appeal) will be required to evaluate the effects of the rate 
increases and associated transportation alternatives on underserved communities. If future 
rate increases are necessary to achieve the 85% parking space occupancy rate, they will 
be analyzed in combination with other incentives to encourage parking away from the 
busiest areas, including expansion of alternative modes of transport and other 
sustainability implementation strategies required by Special Condition 3. The City or the 
Commission may also require additional incentives or programs to address environmental 
justice concerns in future CDPs. Additionally, the City should update its LCP to include 
environmental justice policies, which guide review and analysis of future CDPs. The three-
year authorization will also avoid impacts that could occur as a result of perpetual, 
incremental, and annual increases of parking rates in the coastal zone, which remain a 
concern of the Commission. 
Therefore, the Commission finds that the proposed project, as conditioned, is consistent 
with the Environmental Justice policies of the Coastal Act. 
E. Promotion of Fuel-Efficient or Alternative-Fuel Vehicles 
LUE Goal 1 states:  
Create a community that is sustainable, resilient, and regenerative. 
Intent – The City is committed to meeting its ongoing needs without compromising the 
ability of future generations to meet their own needs. The City recognizes the 
magnitude of the threat that climate change poses. The City can move toward 
sustainability and a reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by the way it manages land 
development and building construction, conserves habitats and natural resources, 
provides efficient transportation and mobility systems, and develops its infrastructure 
and public services. Sites should be planned, buildings designed, and infrastructure 

=== p34
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
34 
developed to reduce the consumption of energy, water, and raw materials, generation 
of waste, and use of toxic and hazardous substances. 
LUE Action 1.1.6 states: 
 
Evaluate and consider eliminating or significantly reducing the cost of parking 
permits for fuel-efficient or alternative-fuel vehicles. 
The City-approved parking rates apply to all motorists in a uniform manner, and there was 
no evaluation and consideration of reduced parking rates for fuel-efficient or alternative-
fuel vehicles in the City’s permit record. However, since the appeal has been filed, the City 
has provided evidence that it promotes alternative fuel vehicles already (through 
installation of electric vehicle charging stations and striping designated parking spaces for 
electric vehicles). Currently, there are electric vehicle stations in at least two City-owned 
parking lots downtown. The City has also indicated that it will continue and expand 
programs and incentives that encourage sustainability and offer alternatives to driving and 
parking (e.g. increased operations of the free trolley and incentives to encourage cycling 
and walking instead of driving), consistent with LUE Goal 1 and Action 1.1.6.  
Special Condition 3 requires the City to evaluate and consider reducing the cost of hourly 
parking rates for the parking spaces adjacent to its electric vehicle charging stations 
located in the City’s parking lots and/or structures before the summer 2020 peak 
visitor/beach use season, and provide the Executive Director with a report on its progress 
no later than December 31, 2020. 
Therefore, the Commission finds that the proposed project, as conditioned, is consistent 
with Action 1.1.6 of the certified LCP cited above. 
F. LOCAL COASTAL PROGRAM 
The City of Laguna Beach Local Coastal Program (LCP) was certified with suggested 
modifications, except for the areas of deferred certification, in July 1992. In February 1993 
the Commission concurred with the Executive Director’s determination that the suggested 
modification had been properly accepted and the City assumed permit-issuing authority at 
that time. The Land Use Plan of the LCP consists of the Coastal Land Use Element, the 
Open Space/Conservation Element, and the Coastal Technical Appendix. The Coastal 
Land Use Element of the LCP was updated and replaced in its entirety via LCPA 1-10 in 
2012. The certified Implementation Plan of the LCP is comprised of a number of different 
documents, but the main document is the City’s Title 25 Zoning Code. The Open 
Space/Conservation Element and Title 25 have been amended a number of times since 
original certification. 
As discussed in this staff report, the proposed project, as conditioned, conforms to the 
provisions of the City of Laguna Beach Certified LCP. 
G. CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA)  
Section 13096(a) of the Commission's administrative regulations requires Commission 
approval of Coastal Development Permit applications to be supported by a finding showing 

=== p35
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
35 
the application, as conditioned by any conditions of approval, to be consistent with any 
applicable requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Section 
21080.5(d)(2)(A) of CEQA prohibits a proposed development from being approved if there 
are feasible alternatives or feasible mitigation measures available, which would substantially 
lessen any significant adverse effect which the activity may have on the environment. 
The City of Laguna Beach is the lead agency for the purposes of CEQA review. On 
December 4, 2019, the Laguna Beach Community Development Department Planning 
Commission adopted a Section 15273(a) CEQA Statutory Exemption (Rates, Tolls, Fares, 
and Charges), which allows for the establishment of parking rates by public agencies for 
the purposes of meeting operating expenses and obtaining funds for capital projects, 
necessary to maintain service within existing service areas. 
In addition, the proposed project has been conditioned to be found consistent with the 
certified LCP. As conditioned to minimize the impact on public access to and along the 
coast and underserved communities, and promote fuel-efficient or alternative-fuel vehicles, 
there are no feasible alternatives or additional feasible mitigation measures available that 
would substantially lessen any significant adverse effect that the activity may have on the 
environment. Therefore, the Commission finds that the proposed project, as conditioned to 
mitigate the identified impacts, is the least environmentally damaging feasible alternative 
and can be found consistent with the requirements of the Coastal Act to conform to CEQA. 
 
 

=== p36
A-5-LGB-20-0001 (City of Laguna Beach) 
Appeal – Substantial Issue & De Novo 
 
 
 
36 
Appendix A – Substantive File Documents 
1. City of Laguna Beach certified Local Coastal Program. 
2. Laguna Beach Community Development Department Planning Commission Staff 
Report for Local CDP 19-5154, dated December 4, 2019. 
3. Downtown Specific Plan Area & Laguna Canyon Road Parking Management Plan 
“2013 PMP” by City of Laguna Beach, dated May 30, 2013. 
4. Laguna Beach Coastal Land Use Plan Technical Appendix by City of Laguna Beach, 
dated August 1984. 
