=== p1
T
HE MONEY YOU PUT INTO a parking meter seems to vanish into thin air. 
No one knows where the money goes, and everyone would rather park free, so 
politicians ﬁnd it easier to require ample off-street parking than to charge market
prices at meters. But if each neighborhood could keep all the parking 
revenue it generates, a powerful new constituency would emerge—
the neighborhoods that receive the revenue. Cities can change the
politics of parking if they earmark parking revenue for 
public improvements in the metered neighborhoods.
Consider an older business district where few stores
have off-street parking, and vacant curb spaces are hard
to ﬁnd. Cruising for curb parking congests the streets,
and everyone complains about a parking shortage.
Parking meters would create a few curb vacancies,
and these vacancies would attract customers willing
to pay for parking if they don’t have to spend time
hunting for it. Nevertheless, merchants fear that
charging for parking would keep some customers
away. Suppose in this case the city promises to use all
the district’s meter revenue to pay for public amenities
that can attract customers, such as cleaning the side-
walks, planting street trees, putting overhead utility wires
underground, improving store facades, and ensuring secu-
rity. Using curb parking revenue to improve the metered area
can therefore create a strong local interest in charging the right
price for curb parking.
2
A C C E S S
Turning Small Change 
Into Big Changes 
B Y D O U G L A S K O L O Z S VA R I A N D D O N A L D S H O U P
D o u g l a s Ko l o z s v a r i r e c e i v e d t h e M A i n u r b a n p l a n n i n g f r o m U C L A 
i n 2 0 0 2 a n d i s n o w a s s o c i a t e p l a n n e r a t t h e S a n M a t e o C o u n t y
Tr a n s i t D i s t r i c t ( k o l o z s v a r i d @ s a m t r a n s . c o m ) , a n d D o n a l d S h o u p 
i s p r o f e s s o r o f u r b a n p l a n n i n g a t t h e U n i v e r s i t y o f C a l i f o r n i a , 
L o s A n g e l e s ( s h o u p @ u c l a . e d u ) .

=== p2
3
A C C E S S
N U M B E R 2 3 , F A L L 2 0 0 3
RIGHT PRICES
The right price for curb parking is the lowest price that keeps a few spaces available to
allow convenient access. If no curb spaces are available, reducing their price cannot attract
more customers, just as reducing the price of anything else in short supply cannot
increase its sales. A below-market price for curb parking simply leads to cruising and 
congestion. The goal of pricing is to produce a few vacant spaces so that drivers can ﬁnd
places to park near their destinations. Having a few parking spaces vacant is like having
inventory in a store, and everyone understands that customers avoid stores that never
have what they want in stock. The city should reduce the price of curb parking if there
are too many vacancies (the inventory is excessive), and increase it if there are too few
(the shelves are bare).
Underpricing curb parking cannot increase the number of cars parked at the curb
because it cannot increase the number of spaces available. What underpricing can do,
however, and what it does do, is create a parking shortage that keeps potential cus-
tomers away. If it takes only five minutes to drive somewhere else, why spend fifteen
cruising for parking? Short-term parkers are less sensitive to the price of parking than
to the time it takes to find a vacant space. Therefore, charging enough to create a few
curb vacancies can attract customers who would rather pay for parking than not be able
to find it. And spending the meter revenue for public improvements can attract even
more customers.
We can examine the effects of this charge-and-spend policy because Pasadena, 
California, charges market prices for curb parking and returns all of the meter revenue
to the business districts that generate it. An evaluation of Pasadena’s program shows it
can help revitalize older business districts by improving their parking, transportation,
and public infrastructure.
OLD PA S ADENA
Pasadena’s downtown declined between 1930 and 1980, but it has
since been revived as “Old Pasadena,” one of Southern California’s most
popular shopping and entertainment destinations. Dedicating parking
meter revenue to ﬁnance public improvements in the area has played a
major part in this revival.
Old Pasadena was the original commercial core of the city, and in
the early 20th century it was an elegant shopping district. In 1929,
Pasadena widened its main thoroughfare, Colorado Boulevard, by 28
feet, and this required moving the building facades on each side of the
street back 14 feet. Owners removed the front 14 feet of their buildings,
and most constructed new facades in the popular Spanish Colonial
Revival or Art Deco styles. However, a few owners put back the original
facades (an early example of historic preservation). The result is a hand-
some circa-1929 streetscape that is now the center of Old Pasadena. 
The area sank into decline during the Depression. After the war the narrow store-
fronts and lack of parking led many merchants to seek larger retail spaces in more 
modern surroundings. Old Pasadena became the city’s Skid Row, and by the 1970s much
of it was slated for redevelopment. Pasadena’s Redevelopment Agency demolished ➢

=== p3
4
A C C E S S
three historic blocks on Colorado Boulevard to make way for Plaza Pasadena, an enclosed
mall with ample free parking whose construction the city assisted with $41 million in 
public subsidies. New buildings clad in then-fashionable black glass replaced other 
historic properties. The resulting “Corporate Pasadena” horriﬁed many citizens, so the
city reconsidered its plans for the area. The Plan for Old Pasadena, published in 1978,
asserted “if the area can be revitalized, building on its special character, it will be unique
to the region.” In 1983, Old Pasadena was listed in the National Register of Historic
Places. However, despite these planning efforts, commercial revival was slow to come,
in part because lack of public investment and the parking shortage were intractable
obstacles.
PARKING METERS AND REVENUE RETURN
Pasadena devised a creative parking policy that has contributed greatly to Old
Pasadena’s revival: it uses Old Pasadena’s parking meter revenue ($1.2 million in 2001)
to ﬁnance additional public spending in the area.
Old Pasadena had no parking meters until 1993, and curb parking was restricted
only by a two-hour time limit. Customers had difficulty ﬁnding places to park because
employees took up the most convenient curb spaces, and moved their cars every two
hours to avoid citations. The city’s staff proposed installing meters to regulate curb park-
ing, but the merchants and property owners opposed the idea. They feared that paid
parking would discourage people from coming to the area at all. Customers and tenants,
they assumed, would simply go to shopping centers like Plaza Pasadena that offered free
parking. Meter proponents countered that employees rather than customers occupied
many curb spaces, and making these spaces available for short-term parking would
attract more customers. Any customers who left because they couldn’t park free would
also make room for others who were willing to pay if they could ﬁnd a space, and who
would probably spend more money in Old Pasadena if they could ﬁnd a space.
Debates about the meters dragged on for two years before the city reached a com-
promise with the merchants and property owners. To defuse opposition, the city offered
to spend all the meter revenue on public investments in Old Pasadena. The merchants
and property owners quickly agreed to the proposal because they would directly beneﬁt
from it. The city also liked it because it wanted to improve Old Pasadena, and the meter
revenue would pay for the project.
The desire for public improvements that would attract customers to Old Pasadena
soon outweighed fear that paid parking would drive customers away. Businesses and 
property owners began to see the parking meters in a new light—as a source of revenue.
They agreed to an unusually high rate of $1 an hour for curb parking, and to the unusual
policy of operating the meters on Sundays and in the evenings when the area is still busy
with visitors. The city also didn’t lose anything in the process. Because there had been no
parking meters anywhere in the city before, returning the revenue to Old Pasadena 
didn’t create a loss to the city’s general fund. Indeed, the city gained revenue from over-
time ﬁnes. Both business and government thus had a stake in the meter money, and so
the project went ahead.
Only the blocks with parking meters receive the added services ﬁnanced by the
meter revenue. The city worked with Old Pasadena’s Business Improvement District
(BID) to establish the boundaries of the Old Pasadena Parking Meter Zone (PMZ). The

=== p4
5
A C C E S S
N U M B E R 2 3 , F A L L 2 0 0 3
city also established the Old Pasadena PMZ Advisory Board, consisting of business 
and property owners who recommend parking policies and set spending priorities for the
zone’s meter revenues. Connecting the meter revenue directly to added public services
and keeping it under local control are largely responsible for the parking program’s 
success. “The only reason meters went into Old Pasadena in the ﬁrst place,” said Marilyn
Buchanan, chair of the Old Pasadena PMZ, “was because the city agreed all the money
would stay in Old Pasadena.”
The city installed the parking meters in 1993, and then borrowed $5 million to
ﬁnance the “Old Pasadena Streetscape and Alleyways Project,” with the meter revenue
dedicated to repaying the debt. The bond proceeds paid for street furniture, trees, tree
grates, and historic lighting ﬁxtures throughout the area. Dilapidated alleys became safe,
functional pedestrian spaces with access to shops and restaurants. To reassure busi-
nesses and property owners that the meter revenues stayed in Old Pasadena, the city
mounted a marketing campaign to tell shoppers what their meter money was funding.
As the area attracted more pedestrian traffic, the sidewalks needed more mainte-
nance. This would have posed a problem when Old Pasadena relied on the city for clean-
ing and maintenance, but now the BID has meter money to pay for the added services.
The BID has arranged for daily sweeping of the streets and sidewalks, trash collection,
removal of decals from street ﬁxtures, and steam cleaning of Colorado Boulevard’s side-
walks twice a month. Dedicating the parking meter revenue to Old Pasadena has thus
created a “virtuous cycle” of continuing improvements. The meter revenue pays for pub-
lic improvements, the public improvements attract more visitors who pay for curb park-
ing, and more meter revenue is then available to pay for more public improvements.
Old Pasadena’s 690 parking meters yielded $1.2 million net parking revenue (after
all collection costs) to fund additional public services in FY 2001. The revenue thus
amounts to $1,712 per meter per year. The ﬁrst claim on this revenue is the annual debt
service of $448,000 that goes to repay the $5 million borrowed to improve the sidewalks
and alleys. Of the remaining revenue, $694,000 was spent to increase public services in
Old Pasadena, above the level provided in other commercial areas. The city provides
some of these services directly; for example, the Police Department provides additional
foot patrols, and two horseback officers on weekend evenings, at a cost of $248,000. The
parking enforcement officers who monitor the meters until well into the night further
increase security, at no additional charge. The city also allocated $426,000 of meter rev-
enue for added sidewalk and street maintenance and for marketing (maps, brochures,
and advertisements in local newspapers). Drivers who park in Old Pasadena ﬁnance all
these public services, at no cost to the businesses, property owners, or taxpayers.
Old Pasadena has done well in comparison with the rest of Pasadena. Its sales tax
revenue increased rapidly after parking meters were installed in 1993, and is now higher
than in the other retail districts in the city. Old Pasadena’s sales tax revenues quickly
exceeded those of Plaza Pasadena, the nearby shopping mall that had free parking. With
great fanfare, Plaza Pasadena was demolished in 2001 to make way for a new develop-
ment—with storefronts that resemble the ones in Old Pasadena.
Would Old Pasadena be better off today with dirty sidewalks, dilapidated alleys, no
street trees or historic street lights, and less security, but with free curb parking? Clearly,
no. Old Pasadena is now a place where everyone wants to be, rather than merely another
place where everyone can park free. ➢

=== p5
6
A C C E S S
A TALE OF TWO BUSINESS DISTRICTS’ PARKING POLICIES
To see how parking policies affect urban outcomes, we can compare Old Pasadena
with Westwood Village, a business district in Los Angeles that was once as popular as Old
Pasadena is now. In 1980, anyone who predicted that Old Pasadena would soon become
hip and Westwood would fade would have been judged insane. However, since then the
Village has declined as Old Pasadena thrived. Why?
Except for their parking policies, Westwood Village and Old Pasadena are similar.
Both are about the same size, both are historic areas, both have design review boards,
and both have BIDS. Westwood Village also has a few advantages that Old Pasadena
lacks. It is surrounded by extremely high-income neighborhoods (Bel Air, Holmby Hills,
and Westwood) and is located between UCLA and the high-rise corridor of Wilshire
Boulevard, which are both sources of many potential customers. Old Pasadena, by 
contrast, is surrounded by moderate-income housing and low-rise office buildings.
Tellingly, although Westwood Village has about the same number of parking spaces as
Old Pasadena, merchants typically blame a parking shortage for the Village’s decline. In
Old Pasadena, parking is no longer a big issue. A study in 2001 found that the average
curb-space occupancy rate in Old Pasadena was 83 percent, which is about the ideal rate
to assure available space for shoppers. The meter revenue has financed substantial 
public investment in sidewalk and alley improvements that attract visitors to the stores,
restaurants, and movie theaters. Because all the meter revenue stays in Old Pasadena,
the merchants and property owners understand that paid parking helps business.
In contrast, Westwood’s curb parking is underpriced and overcrowded. A 1994 
parking study found that the curb-space occupancy rate was 96 percent during peak hours,
making it necessary for visitors to search for vacant spaces. The city nevertheless reduced
SALES TAX REVENUE
(in millions of dollars)
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
Pasadena retail sales-tax revenue
Old Pasadena
Playhouse District
Plaza Pasadena
South Lake
Westwood Village

=== p6
7
A C C E S S
N U M B E R 2 3 , F A L L 2 0 0 3
meter rates from $1 to 50¢ an hour in
1994, in response to merchants’ and prop-
erty owners’ argument that cheaper curb 
parking would stimulate business. Off-
street parking in any of the nineteen 
private lots or garages in Westwood costs
at least $2 for the first hour, so drivers
have an incentive to hunt for cheaper curb
parking. The result is a shortage of curb
spaces, and underuse of the off-street
ones. The 1994 study found that only 68
percent of the Village’s 3,900 off-street
parking spaces were occupied at the peak
daytime hour (2 p.m.). Nevertheless, the
shortage of curb spaces (which are only
14 percent of the total parking supply) 
creates the illusion of an overall parking
shortage. In contrast to Old Pasadena,
Westwood’s sidewalks and alleys are
crumbling because there is no source of
revenue for repairing them—the meter
revenue disappears into the city’s general
fund.
The Old Pasadena/Westwood Vil-
lage comparison suggests that parking
policies can help some areas rebound,
and leave other areas trapped in a slump. If Westwood Village had always charged mar-
ket prices for curb parking and had spent the revenue on public services, it probably
would have retained its original luster rather than fallen into a long economic decline. If
Old Pasadena had kept curb parking free and not spent $1.2 million a year on public serv-
ices, it probably would still be struggling. The exactly opposite parking policies in West-
wood Village and Old Pasadena have surely helped determine their different fates. As the
signs on Old Pasadena’s parking meters say, “Your meter money makes a difference.”
CONCLUSION
Charging market prices for curb parking and returning the meter revenue for pub-
lic improvements have helped pave the way for Old Pasadena’s renaissance. The meter
revenue has paid to improve the streetscape and to convert alleys into pleasant walkways
with shops and restaurants. The additional public spending makes the area safer, cleaner,
and more attractive for both customers and businesses. These public improvements have
increased private investment, property values, and sales tax revenues. Old Pasadena has
pulled itself up by its parking meters. N
F U R T H E R R E A D I N G
Douglas Kolozsvari. Parking: The Way to
Revitalization. A Case Study on Innovative
Parking Practices in Old Pasadena.
Comprehensive project submitted for the
Master of Arts in Urban Planning, UCLA, 2002.
Donald Shoup, “Cashing in on Curb Parking,”
Access, no. 4, Spring 1994, pp. 20–26.
Donald Shoup, “An Opportunity to Reduce
Minimum Parking Requirements,” Journal of
the American Planning Association, vol. 61,
no. 1, Winter 1995, pp. 14–28.
Donald Shoup, “Buying Time at the Curb,” in
The Half-Life of Policy Rationales: How New
Technology Affects Old Policy Issues, Fred
Foldvary and Daniel Klein, eds. (New York:
New York University Press, 2003).
Donald Shoup, “The Ideal Source of Local
Public Revenue,” Regional Science and Urban
Economics, forthcoming.
Donald Shoup, The High Cost of Free Parking.
(Chicago: The Planners Press of the American
Planning Association, forthcoming.)
Westwood Village
