
--- p1
Nuisance vehicles –
Public Space Protection Order 2024
Analysis of stakeholder consultation
December 2024
Consultation and Participation Team
The Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea
consult@rbkc.gov.uk

--- p2
Introduction
Background
The Council asked residents and key stakeholders if they support the renewal of the Public Spaces Protection Order (PSPO) 
– Nuisance vehicles, for a further three years, following the 2021 public consultation that overwhelmingly supported the 
expansion of the PSPO to cover the whole of the borough and the increased use of acoustic cameras. This Order was 
created to manage a minority of drivers whose driving habits create a nuisance to the local community and environment, 
affecting the quality of life of both residents and those working in the area.
It is intended that the prohibitions remain the same as the 2021-2024 PSPO. Since November 2021 to 3 October 2024 1,615 
breaches of the PSPO – nuisance vehicles were recorded, with 577 fixed penalty notices being issued for nuisance vehicle 
offences.
Consultation methodology 
An online consultation on the proposed renewal of the PSPO was launched on 28 October 2024. It was published on the 
Council’s consultation hub and promoted through Council e-newsletters and social media channels.
Petition
Independently from the Council’s consultation, a petition was launched, supported by the three Holland ward Councillors, to 
support the plan to deploy acoustic cameras in a boroughwide Public Spaces Protection Order zone to fine the drivers of 
noisy vehicles. The petition was signed by 242 residents, 184 of which were in favour.
Report
A total of 184 surveys were returned by the closing date of 24 November 2024.This report contains an analysis of the survey 
responses and examples of the comments made. An appendices document is also available on request, containing data 
tables (appendix one) and all comments made by respondents to the survey (appendix two). 
Acknowledgements
The Council would like to thank all respondents that took the time to feedback their views.

--- p3
Results at a glance – Public survey findings
- Most common antisocial activities: The most common antisocial activities caused by vehicles considered by 
respondents were speeding (68 per cent), sudden/rapid acceleration (62 per cent) and revving of engine (61 per 
cent). The least frequent were performing stunts with motor vehicles (35 per cent) and driving in convoy (27 per 
cent).
- Frequency of all antisocial activities: A total of 51 per cent of respondents said antisocial activities caused by 
vehicles occurred daily or more.
- Timings of antisocial activities: 78 per cent of responses indicated the evening (6pm to midnight) was the 
most common time for antisocial activities caused by motor vehicles weekdays and weekends. This was 
followed by 59 per cent of respondents who selected weekends overnight (midnight to 6am) and weekend 
afternoons (12 noon to 6pm) with 52 per cent.
- Support of the PSPO: The majority of respondents (97 per cent combined) are strongly supporting or 
supporting the renewal of the PSPO.

--- p4
Antisocial behaviour caused by motor vehicles
Respondents were asked what activities caused by a motor vehicle create undue noise, nuisance, annoyance, 
danger or harm to them or a property.
The activities that at least 50 per cent of respondents indicated were a frequent issue, were:
• Speeding with 68 per cent 
• Sudden/rapid acceleration with 62 per cent
• Revving of engine with 61 per cent
• Idle engine (stationary vehicles) with 59 per cent
The following activities had the highest percentage of respondents indicating that the activity never occurred:
• Performing stunts with motor vehicles with 35 per cent indicating this never occurs
• Driving in convoy with 27 per cent

--- p5
Antisocial behaviour caused by motor vehicles
Base: All responses (184)

--- p6
Antisocial behaviour caused by motor vehicles – other 
comments
Respondents were asked to provide details of any other type of anti-social behaviour cause by motor vehicles. The 
comments made have been themed and themes with seven or more comments have been summarised in the table 
below. Examples of the comments made can be found on the next pages whilst the full list of comments is available in 
the appendix report. 
Theme
Count
Sounding of horn/speeding/revving of cars and 
motorbikes
36
Noisy exhausts of cars and motorbikes
17
Disregarding zebra crossing/pedestrian area
11
Bikes going wrong way/on pavement
9
Illegal parking
7

--- p7
Antisocial behaviour caused by motor vehicles
Respondents were asked to provide as much detail as they could if they had experienced antisocial behaviour from 
vehicles. The comments made have been themed and themes with four or more comments have been summarised in 
the table below. Examples of the comments made can be found on the next pages whilst the full list of comments is 
available in the appendix report. 
Theme
Count
Speeding/engines’ revving/loud exhausts
46
Residents’ quality of life in decline
10
Intentional disturbance
8
Loud music from cars
7
Motorbikes causing anti-social behaviour
7
Pedestrian crossing dangerous
6
Bikes issue (riding and congesting pavements, speed 
etc.)
4
Different concerns on traffic enforcement
4

--- p8
Details of anti-social behaviour- comments
“I live near Harrods and foreign cars and their 
drivers make it their personal race tracks. 
They also use the Beaufort Garden cul-de-sac 
and cause great hazard to the residents and 
safety of property.”
Intentional disturbance
“Constant loud revving of engines from 
sports cars and associated anti-social 
behaviour disrupt the quality of life in the 
borough late into the evening every day for 
residents and visitors alike.”
Speeding/engines’ revving/loud exhausts
“Multiple cars sitting in the constant 
traffic blaring loud music.”
Loud music from cars
“Frequent racing along Chelsea Bridge Road 
to Battersea Park creates noise which 
disturbs my sleep and wellbeing. 
SUVs on the school run cause much engine 
idling and horn blowing twice each day in 
term time.”
Residents’ quality of life in decline
“At least 50 bicycles per day ridden 
either on the pavement or the wrong 
way along one way street - specifically 
Eardley Crescent SW5 9JZ. Council 
officials have refused to take the issue 
seriously.”
Bikes issue (riding and congesting 
pavements, speed etc.)

--- p9
Details of anti-social behaviour from vehicles
Respondents were asked how often the antisocial behaviour occur in the instance they mentioned in the previous 
question.
•
Over half of respondents (51 per cent) indicated that the antisocial behaviour occurs daily (or more frequently)
•
Over a quarter of respondents (27 per cent) stated Weekly
•
A minority of seven per cent responded Fortnightly and Monthly
Base: All responses (184)

--- p10
Timings of antisocial behaviour
Respondents were asked to indicate when the antisocial behaviour caused by motor vehicles is an issue and could 
choose more than one option.
•
Most responses (78 per cent) were Weekday evenings and Weekend evenings (78 per cent) 
•
Over half of responses stated Weekdays overnight (59 per cent) and Weekend afternoons (52 per cent) 
Base: 
All 
respon
ses 
(184)

--- p11
Renewing the PSPO in relation to nuisance vehicles
Respondents were asked if, overall, they would support the renewal of the PSPO for nuisance vehicles.
•
The vast majority of respondents (97 per cent combined) either Strongly support (93 per cent) or Support 
(four per cent) the renewal
Base: All responses (184)

--- p12
Concerns on the renewal of the PSPO- comments
Respondents were asked if they had any concerns about the renewal of the PSPO. The comments made have been 
themed and themes with four or more comments have been summarised in the table below. Examples of the 
comments made can be found on the next page whilst the full list of comments is available in the appendix report. 
Theme
Count
Better enforcement needed
14
No concerns/in favour of renewal
12
Extend it to 24h
11
More monitoring systems needed
4

--- p13
Concerns on the renewal of the PSPO- comments
“It is fine to renew the PSPO but these rules 
need to be enforced and at the moment we 
see/hear very little difference.”
Better enforcement needed
“No concerns.”
No concerns/in favour of the renewal
“None. More legislation required. 
More attention and noise equipment to detect, 
fine and deter offenders.”
Better enforcement needed
“Renew ASAP.”
No concerns/in favour of the renewal
“The hours are too restrictive. It should apply 
24/7. Make it stronger please.”
Extend it
“These rules should be in force 24 hours a 
day, seven days a week. Please install more 
sound monitors.”
Extend it
“Only that enforcement is weak. […]”
Better enforcement needed
“More noise cameras are needed in 
Chelsea. They need to be focussed on 
cars tuned to be very noisy.”
More monitoring systems needed

--- p14
Antisocial behaviour caused by motor vehicles - comments
Respondents were asked if they had any further comments to make in relation to antisocial behaviour from vehicles.
The comments made have been themed and themes with eight or more comments have been summarised in the table 
below. Examples of the comments made can be found on the next pages whilst the full list of comments is available in 
the appendix report. 
Theme
Count
More enforcement needed (fines, cameras, speed 
humps)
25
Distressing situation 
12
Look into bikes issue
11
Comment on a specific road/instance
9
Supporting PSPO
8

--- p15
Antisocial behaviour caused by motor vehicles- Any 
other comments
“Anti-social behaviour makes me feel insecure.”
Distressing situation
“The antisocial noise from sudden acceleration and 
extremely noisy vehicles is different from 
background, steady traffic noise. One expects 
traffic noise living on a busy road (Holland Road), 
however the antisocial traffic noise affects sleep, 
which has an overall effect on quality of life. It is 
distressing to be woken up so frequently.”
Distressing situation
“Include electric scooters and electric bikes, 
they are far more dangerous.”
Look into bikes issue
“More police/government  enforcement of 
engine volume, especially motorbikes. 
In the case of Finborough Road, Speed bumps 
would greatly reduce, speeding and the loud 
revving of motorbike engines.”
More enforcement needed (fines, cameras, 
speed humps)
“Police action against noisy cars is 
needed along side noise cameras.”
More enforcement needed (fines, 
cameras, speed humps)
“It is imperative that the PSPO is 
renewed.”
Supporting PSPO

--- p16
Comments on locations 
When asked about details of anti-social behaviour, respondents mentioned specific locations where the nuisance 
takes place. Across all comments, the table below shows the most mentioned locations. The list of comments 
including mentioned locations can be found in full in the appendices report.
Theme
Count
Chelsea Embankment
10
King’s Road
10
Earl’s Court (including Warwick road/gardens) 
7
Kensington High Street
6
Knightsbridge
5
Holland road/Holland Park Avenue
4

--- p17
Capacity in which responding
Respondents were asked in what capacity they were responding.
• The majority of respondents (94 per cent) identified as Resident of Kensington and Chelsea
• A minority of ten per cent responded Business/worker within Kensington and Chelsea
Base: All responses (184)

--- p18
Demographics of respondents
Base: All responses (184)
Respondents were asked a series of questions about themselves, to understand who had responded to the 
consultation.​

--- p19
Demographics of respondents
Base: All responses (184)

--- p20
Demographics of respondents
Base: All responses (922)
