 
 Text to speech avatar overview - Speech service - Foundry Tools | Microsoft Learn 
 Skip to main content
 Skip to Ask Learn chat experience
 This browser is no longer supported.
 Upgrade to Microsoft Edge to take advantage of the latest features, security updates, and technical support.
 Download Microsoft Edge
 More info about Internet Explorer and Microsoft Edge
 Table of contents 
 Exit editor mode 
 Ask Learn 
 Ask Learn 
 Reading mode 
 Table of contents 
 Read in English 
 Add 
 Add to Plans 
 Edit 
 Copy Markdown 
 Print 
 Note 
 Access to this page requires authorization. You can try signing in or changing directories .
 Access to this page requires authorization. You can try changing directories .
 What is Text to speech avatar?
 Feedback 
 Summarize this article for me
 In this article
 Text to speech avatar converts text into a digital video of a photorealistic human (either a standard avatar or a custom text to speech avatar ) speaking with a natural-sounding voice. You can synthesize the text to speech avatar video asynchronously or in real time. Developers can build applications integrated with text to speech avatar through an API, or use Text to speech avatar in Foundry to create video content without coding.
 By using text to speech avatar's advanced models, you can deliver life-like and high-quality synthetic talking avatar videos for various applications while adhering to responsible AI practices .
 Tip
 To convert text to speech with a no-code approach, try the Microsoft Foundry Text to Speech avatar .
 Avatar capabilities
 Text to speech avatar capabilities include:
 Converts text into a digital video of a photorealistic human speaking with natural-sounding voices powered by Azure AI text to speech.
 Provides a collection of standard avatars. See Standard avatars for a full list of supported standard avatars.
 Azure AI text to speech generates the voice of the avatar. For more information, see Avatar voice and language .
 Synthesizes text to speech avatar video asynchronously with the batch synthesis API or in real-time .
 Use Text to speech avatar tool in Microsoft Foundry for creating video content without coding.
 Enables real-time avatar conversations through the Voice Live in Foundry .
 Create voice agent with avatar in Voice Live .
 By using text to speech avatar's advanced neural network models and Photo avatar's Microsoft VASA model, you can deliver lifelike and high-quality synthetic talking avatar videos for various applications while adhering to responsible AI practices.
 Avatar voice and language
 You can choose from a range of standard voices for the avatar. The language support for text to speech avatar is the same as the language support for text to speech. For details, see Language and voice support for the Speech service . You can access standard text to speech avatars through the Microsoft Foundry Text to Speech avatar or via API.
 The voice in the synthetic video can be an Azure Speech in Foundry Tools standard voice or the custom voice of voice talent selected by you.
 Avatar type
 Video Avatar: The avatar is generated by using a fine-tuned model with a video recording for fine tuning. It supports half-body and full-body representations.
 Photo Avatar: You create the avatar from a single input image as prompt and is limited to a head-only representation. Photo Avatar is available in two variants: standard Photo Avatar, which generates a talking-head video from a single photo, and custom Photo Avatar, which lets you fine-tune the avatar's look from your own image. For more information about the custom variant, see What is custom text to speech avatar .
 Avatar video output
 For video avatar or avatar with body, both batch synthesis and real-time synthesis resolution default to 1920 x 1080. You can choose to train 4K resolution custom avatars, and the frames per second (FPS) rate is 25. For batch synthesis, the codec can be H264, HEVC, or AV1 if the format is mp4 . It can be VP9 or AV1 if the format is webm . Only vp9 can contain an alpha channel. For real-time synthesis, the codec is H264. You can configure the video bitrate in the request for both batch synthesis and real-time synthesis. The default value is 2,000,000. More detailed configurations can be found in the sample code.
Photo avatar resolution is 512x512 for both batch synthesis and real-time synthesis.
 Video Avatar
 | 
 Batch synthesis | 
 Real-time synthesis | 
 Resolution | 
 1920 x 1080/3840 x 2160 | 
 1920 x 1080/3840 x 2160 | 
 FPS | 
 25 | 
 25 | 
 Codec | 
 H264/HEVC/VP9/AV1 | 
 H264 | 
 Photo Avatar
 | 
 Batch synthesis | 
 Real-time synthesis | 
 Resolution | 
 512x512 | 
 512x512 | 
 FPS | 
 25 | 
 25 | 
 Codec | 
 H264/HEVC/VP9 | 
 H264 | 
 Custom text to speech avatar
 You can create custom text to speech avatars that are unique to your product or brand. For a custom video avatar, all it takes to get started is 10 minutes of video recordings. For a custom photo avatar, you need a photo along with about one minute of consent audio, which the service uses to better match the voice to the avatar. If you fine-tune a professional voice for the actor, the avatar can be highly realistic.
 Several options are available for the voice part of a custom avatar:
 1. Voice sync for avatar
 Voice sync for avatar is the most efficient custom voice option for a custom video avatar. It trains alongside the custom avatar by using audio from the training video. The voice exclusively associates with the custom avatar and can't be used independently. Voice sync for avatar is only available for the custom video avatar. For more information, see Voice sync for avatar .
 2. Professional voice
 Professional voice is a type of custom voice that provides higher voice quality. Professional voice fine-tuning and custom text to speech avatar have separate processes for obtaining limited access and training models. You can use them independently or together. If you plan to also use professional voice fine-tuning with a text to speech avatar, you need to deploy or copy your fine-tuned professional voice model to one of the avatar supported regions .
 3. Personal voice
 Personal voice provides audio quality comparable to the voice sync for avatar and can be used either with avatars or independently.
 For more information, see What is custom text to speech avatar .
 Sample code
 Sample code for text to speech avatar is available on GitHub . These samples cover the most popular scenarios:
 Batch synthesis (REST) 
 Real-time synthesis (SDK) 
 Use avatar in Voice live API 
 Pricing
 Throughout an avatar real-time session or batch content creation, you pay separately for the text to speech.
 Voice sync for an avatar (through custom avatar training) costs the same as a personal voice for voice creation and synthesis. The storage of the voice is free.
 To learn how billing works for the text-to-speech avatar feature, see text to speech avatar pricing note .
 For detailed pricing, see Speech service pricing . Avatar pricing is visible only for service regions where the feature is available. For the current list of supported regions, see the Speech service regions table .
 Available locations
 For the current list of regions that support text to speech avatar, see the Speech service regions table .
 Responsible AI
 Microsoft cares about the people who use AI and the people who are affected by it as much as it cares about technology. For more information, see the Responsible AI transparency notes and disclosure for voice and avatar talent .
 Next steps
 Use batch synthesis for text to speech avatar 
 What is custom text to speech avatar 
 Feedback
 Was this page helpful?
 Yes 
 No 
 No 
 Need help with this topic?
 Want to try using Ask Learn to clarify or guide you through this topic?
 Ask Learn 
 Ask Learn 
 Suggest a fix? 
 Additional resources
 Last updated on 
 2026-08-18
 In this article
 Was this page helpful?
 Need help with this topic?
 Want to try using Ask Learn to clarify or guide you through this topic?
 Ask Learn 
 Ask Learn 
 Suggest a fix? 
 en-us 
 Your Privacy Choices 
 Theme 
 Light 
 Dark 
 High contrast 
 AI Disclaimer 
 Previous Versions 
 Blog 
 Contribute 
 Privacy 
 Consumer Health Privacy 
 Terms of Use 
 Trademarks 
 © Microsoft 2026
 