 
 D-ID Privacy Policy | D-ID 
 Skip to main content
 Product 
 AI Video Generator 
 Visual AI Agents 
 AI Avatars 
 Agentic Videos 
 Features 
 Solutions 
 Marketing Suite 
 Sales Solutions 
 Customer Experience 
 Learning & Development 
 Technology 
 API 
 Integrations 
 V4 Expressive Avatars 
 V4 Tech Specs 
 Self-Hosting 
 Pricing 
 Studio 
 API 
 Enterprise 
 Enterprise 
 Case Studies 
 Trust Center 
 Company 
 About Us 
 Blog 
 Careers 
 Leadership 
 Partners 
 News 
 Resources 
 End User License 
 D-ID Products Terms of Use 
 Privacy Policy 
 Help Center 
 Ethics 
 Contact Sales
 Start Free Trial
 Log in
 TABLE OF CONTENTS
 D-ID Privacy Policy
 Cookies Policy
 Privacy Policy
 Studio Privacy
 Affiliate Terms
 Studio EULA
 End User Agreement
 Biometric Privacy Policy
 Last Updated: September 11th, 2024 
 This privacy policy (“ Privacy Policy ”) governs how we, De-Identification Ltd. and De-Identification Inc. (together, “ D-ID ”, “ we ”, “ our ” or “ us ”) use, collect and store Personal Data we collect or receive from or about you (“ you ”) such as in the following use cases:
 When you browse or visit our website, www.d-id.com (“ Website ”);
 When you make use of, or interact with, our Website:
 When you contact us to request a demo or for any other inquiry;
 When you contact us;
 When we process your job application; and
 When you download material from the Website.
 When you attend a marketing event, exchange business cards with us or otherwise and provide us with your personal data for marketing purposes.
 When we use the personal data of our customers, prospects or service providers (e.g. contact details).
 When you interact with us on our social media profiles (e.g., Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, LinkedIn).
 When you make use of, or interact with, our web application, mobile software applications or the D-ID plugins (including AI Presenters for PowerPoint) or our application programming interface software that is called or queried under an API Call (collectively, the “ Software “):
 When you create an account and when you log in;
 When you upload photos, text, video and/or audio, for creating video animations (“ Animation(s) ”) and/or receiving an output; 
 When you connect to get and/or share your Animations; and
 When you upgrade to become a Paying User.
 Please read this Privacy Policy carefully, so you can understand our practices and your rights in relation to personal data. “ Personal Data ” means any information that can be used, alone or together with other data, to uniquely identify any living human being and any information deemed as Personally Identifiable Information by privacy laws and including but not limited to, email address, phone number, mailing address, and other contact information as well as IP addresses, device identifiers and other unique identifiers. Please note that this is a master privacy policy and some of its provisions only apply to individuals in certain jurisdictions. For example, the legal basis in the table below is only relevant to GDPR-protected individuals. 
 “ Applicative Data ” means any data submitted to the Software for processing and including but not limited to, usage data such as features used, time spent, interaction data, system logs, referral data, content interactions and creation (including voice cloning) and performance data. In this respect please note the following: Nothing in this Privacy Policy is intended to limit in any way your statutory right, including your rights to a remedy or means of enforcement. You further acknowledge that D-ID is unaware of Personal Data, if any, that you may or may not include as part of the Applicative Data uploaded for processing and D-ID hereby advises you to follow the Privacy by Design methodologies and to minimize, if not to eliminate, providing any unnecessary Personal Data.
 This Privacy Policy can be updated from time to time and, therefore, we ask you to check back periodically for the latest version of this Privacy Policy. If we implement significant changes to the use of your Personal Data in a manner different from that stated at the time of collection, we will notify you by posting a notice on our Website and/or the Software or by other means.
 1. What personal data we collect, why we collect it, and how it is used 
 (I) When you browse or visit our Website 
 Specific Personal Data we collect: Cookies; IP address; analytics data (e.g. pages viewed); log files. For more information, please read our cookies policy .
 Why is the Personal Data collected and for what purposes?To operate and improve our Website; to remember your preferences and various settings and personalize your experience; for security purposes; to monitor the usage of our Website.
 Legal basis (GDPR only, if applicable):Legitimate interest (essential cookies); Consent (non-essential cookies). You may withdraw your consent at any time as set forth in Section 5 below.
 Consequences of not providing the personal data:Certain Website features may not be available. Read more about the purposes of each cookie here .
 (II) When you make use of, or interact with, our Website 
 (1) When you contact us to request a demo or for any other inquiry 
 Specific Personal Data we collect: Full name; email address; country; company name; phone number; any other data that you decide to provide us.
 Why is the Personal Data collected and for what purposes? Such personal data is required in order to facilitate a conversation with you, whether you are a prospect or just looking to better understand what we do; to provide you with a demo; to send you marketing communications.
 Legal basis (GDPR only, if applicable):Legitimate interest (e.g. provide a demo or answer a question); Processing is necessary for the performance of a contract (i.e. license agreement) to which the data subject is party or in order to take steps at the request of the data subject prior to entering into a contract; Consent (marketing). You may withdraw your consent at any time as set forth in Section 5 below.
 Consequences of not providing the personal data: Cannot facilitate conversations with prospects; cannot provide you with a demo; cannot send you marketing communications.
 (2) When you contact us 
 Specific Personal Data we collect: Full name; email address; company name; job title; phone number; any other data that you decide to provide us.
 Why is the Personal Data collected and for what purposes? To process and respond to your request; to send you marketing communications.
 Legal basis (GDPR only, if applicable):Legitimate interest (e.g. provide a demo or answer a question); Processing is necessary for the performance of a contract (i.e. license agreement) to which the data subject is party or in order to take steps at the request of the data subject prior to entering into a contract; Consent (marketing). You may withdraw your consent at any time as set forth in Section 5 below.
 Consequences of not providing the personal data: Cannot process and respond to your request; cannot send you marketing communications.
 (3) When we process your job application 
 Specific Personal Data we collect: Full name; email address; phone number; CV/Resume; any other data that you decide to provide us. Please note that in some cases we also receive this personal data from third parties such as recruitment agencies.
 Why is the Personal Data collected and for what purposes? To assess you as a candidate; to analyze your application; to communicate with you.
 Legal basis (GDPR only, if applicable): Processing is necessary for the performance of a contract (i.e. license agreement) to which the data subject is party or in order to take steps at the request of the data subject prior to entering into a contract (i.e. employment contract); Legitimate interest (e.g. to assess you as a candidate).   
 Consequences of not providing the personal data: Cannot assess you as a candidate; cannot analyze your application; cannot communicate with you.
 (III) When you attend a marketing event, exchange business cards with us or otherwise provide us with your personal data for marketing purposes 
 Specific Personal Data we collect: Full name; email address; company name; job title; phone number; any other data that you decide to provide us.
 Why is the Personal Data collected and for what purposes? To establish a business connection; to send you marketing communications.
 Legal basis (GDPR only, if applicable):Legitimate interest (e.g. to establish a business connection); Consent (marketing). You may withdraw your consent at any time as set forth in Section 5 below.
 Consequences of not providing the personal data: Cannot establish a business connection; cannot send you marketing communications.
 (IV) When we use the personal data of our customers, prospects or service providers (e.g. contact details) 
 Specific Personal Data we collect: Full name; email address; physical address; phone number; company name and details; payment information; any other data that you decide to provide us.
 Why is the Personal Data collected and for what purposes? To provide our products and services; to perform the applicable agreement; to communicate with you.
 Legal basis (GDPR only, if applicable): Processing is necessary for the performance of a contract to which our customer is a party; compliance with a legal obligation (e.g. tax laws, bookkeeping laws, etc.); legitimate interest (e.g. send you contract-related communications).
 Consequences of not providing the personal data: Cannot provide our products and services; cannot perform the applicable agreement; cannot communicate with our customers/clients.
 (V) When you interact with us on our social media profiles (e.g., Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, LinkedIn) 
 Specific Personal Data we collect: Full name; email address; social media channel; any other data that you decide to provide us.
 Why is the Personal Data collected and for what purposes? To respond to your requests via our social media channels; to send you marketing communication.
 Legal basis (GDPR only, if applicable): Legitimate interest (e.g. respond to your requests in our social media channels); Consent (marketing). You may withdraw your consent at any time as set forth in Section 5 below.
 Consequences of not providing the personal data: Cannot respond your request in our social media channels; cannot send you marketing communications.
 (VI) When you make use of, or interact with the Software 
 (1) When you create an account and when you log in 
 Specific Personal Data we collect:Full name, email address, email credentials included as part of an SSO login (for example, your profile picture thumbnail, if applicable), location data, name of device and/or browser used, job title and any other information that you decide to provide us via email and/or other means of communication.
 Why is the Personal Data collected and for what purposes? To be able to create an account and login to your account, to be able understand who our users are in order to be able to better serve them, to enjoy features available to registered users only and to be able to send you notifications and marketing collateral.
 Legal basis (GDPR only, if applicable):Performance of a contract to which the data subject is party or in order to take steps at the request of the data subject prior to entering into a contract, or legitimate interest (e.g. to create your account).
 Consequences of not providing the personal data: Cannot provide our products and services; cannot perform the applicable agreement.
 (2) When you upload photos, text and/or audio, for creating video animations and/or receiving an output 
 Specific Personal Data we collect: photos, text (which may include Personal Data), audio (which may include Personal Data).
 Why is the Personal Data collected and for what purposes? We ask your permission to access your device’s camera in order to allow you to take a picture of yourself or of any other individual so we will be able to use the pictures in order to create Animations and/or in order for you to be able to receive a certain output. We ask your permission to access your device’s microphone to allow you to upload an audio recording. We also ask your permission to access your device’s gallery so we could create the Animations and/or in order for you to be able to receive a certain output from existing pictures that you select on your device. You are responsible for making sure that you have any and all necessary approvals, consents and authorizations of third parties to take a picture and/or audio recording and/or upload them to the Software.
 Legal basis (GDPR only, if applicable): Consent (for accessing your device’s camera and gallery and/or microphone), Performance of a contract to which the data subject is party or in order to take steps at the request of the data subject prior to entering into a contract, or legitimate interest (e.g. to let you create Animations and/or receive an output). You may withdraw your consent at any time as set forth in Section 5 below.
 Consequences of not providing the personal data: Cannot provide our products and services; cannot perform the applicable agreement.
 (3) When you connect to get and/or share your Animation(s)  
 Specific Personal Data we collect: Full name, email address, email credentials included as part of an SSO login (for example, your profile picture thumbnail, if applicable), location data, name of device and/or browser used, job title and any other information that you decide to provide us via email and/or other means of communication.
 Why is the Personal Data collected and for what purposes? To be able to view your Animations gallery and to download and share Animations.
 Legal basis (GDPR only, if applicable): Performance of a contract to which the data subject is party or in order to take steps at the request of the data subject prior to entering into a contract, or legitimate interest (e.g. to let you download and share the Animations).
 Consequences of not providing the personal data: Cannot provide our products and services; cannot perform the applicable agreement.
 (4) When you upgrade to become a Paying User  
 Specific Personal Data we collect: Payment information (credit card number last 4 digits, expiration date and name of cart provider).
 Why is the Personal Data collected and for what purposes? To be able to process your payments.
 Legal basis (GDPR only, if applicable): Performance of a contract to which the data subject is party or in order to take steps at the request of the data subject prior to entering into a contract.
 Consequences of not providing the personal data: Cannot provide our products and services; cannot perform the applicable agreement.
 Finally, please note that some of the abovementioned Personal Data will be used for detecting, taking steps to prevent, and prosecution of fraud or other illegal activity, to identify and repair errors, to conduct audits, and for security purposes. Personal Data may also be used to comply with applicable laws, with investigations performed by the relevant authorities, law enforcement purposes, and/or to exercise or defend legal claims. In certain cases, we may or will anonymize or de-identify your Personal Data and further use it for internal and external purposes, including, without limitation, to improve the services and for research purposes. “ Anonymous Information ” means information which does not enable identification of an individual user, such as aggregated information about the use of our services. We may use Anonymous Information and/or disclose it to third parties without restrictions (for example, in order to improve our services and enhance your experience with them). Use of a personal e-mail address in order to access and use the Software is not mandated. We recommend that the e-mail address used when accessing the Software would be the e-mail address connected with Credits (as defined in the D-ID Products Terms of Use, available here: https://www.d-id.com/studio-end-user-license-agreement/ ), such as studio@company.com or other address which does not include any specific personal name. Please kindly note that the Software does not interpret or analyze any Personal Data, and thus does not modify any Personal Data uploaded to it. You are expected to minimize as much as possible the provision of any Personal Data unless absolutely necessary for your expected result when using the Software. For the avoidance of doubt, this also applies to the use of any synthetic faces when using the Software.
 2. How we protect and retain your personal data 
 1. Security. We have implemented appropriate technical, organizational and security measures designed to protect your Personal Data. However, please note that we cannot guarantee that the information will not be compromised as a result of unauthorized penetration to our servers. As the security of information depends in part on the security of the computer, device or network you use to communicate with us and the security you use to protect your user IDs and passwords, please make sure to take appropriate measures to protect this information.
 2. Retention of your Personal Data. Your Personal Data will be stored until we delete the record and we proactively delete it or you send a valid deletion request. Please note that in some circumstances we may store your Personal Data for longer periods of time, for example (i) where we are required to do so in accordance with legal, regulatory, tax or accounting requirements, or (ii) for us to have an accurate record of your dealings with us in the event of any complaints or challenges, or (iii) if we reasonably believe there is a prospect of litigation relating to your Personal Data or dealings. Regarding retention of cookies, you can read more in our cookie policy .
 3. How we share your personal data 
 We may share your Personal Data as follows:
 1. With our service providers:
 With cloud service providers for hosting purposes;
 With websites and web content creation platforms and/or tools in order to help us manage our Website and/or Software and to provide our services;
 With email providers, marketing, CRM (e.g., Salesforce or Hubspot) and other similar tool providers; and
 With analytic companies, in order to help us understand and analyze information we collect in accordance with this policy (including text and/or photos). 
 2. With our business partners with whom we jointly offer products or services. We may also share Personal Data with our affiliated companies.
 3. To the extent necessary, with regulators, courts or competent authorities, to comply with applicable laws, regulations and rules (including, without limitation, federal, state or local laws), and requests of law enforcement, regulatory and other governmental agencies or if required to do so by court order;
 4. If, in the future, we sell or transfer, or we consider selling or transferring, some or all of our business, shares or assets to a third party, we will disclose your Personal Data to such third party (whether actual or potential) in connection with the foregoing events;
 5. In the event that we are acquired by, or merged with, a third party entity, or in the event of bankruptcy or a comparable event, we reserve the right to transfer, disclose or assign your Personal Data in connection with the foregoing events, including, in connection with, or during negotiations of, any merger, sale of company assets, consolidation or restructuring, financing, or acquisition of all or a portion of our business by or to another company; and/or 
 6. Where you have provided your consent to us sharing or transferring your Personal Data (e.g., where you provide us with marketing consents or opt-in to optional additional services or functionality).
 4. Additional information regarding transfers of personal data 
 1. Storage: We store the Personal Data with the following storing companies: Salesforce, Hubspot and ZenDesk with servers located in the US (with respect to the Website); AWS with servers located in Oregon, USA (with respect to the Software and Applicative Data). 
 2. External transfers: Where we transfer your Personal Data outside of EU/EEA (for example to third parties who provide us with services), we will generally obtain contractual commitments from them to protect your Personal Data. When D-ID engages in such transfers of Personal Data, it relies on i) Adequacy Decisions as adopted by European Commission on the basis of Article 45 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR) (for example, when we access from Israel), or ii) Standard Contractual Clauses issued by the European Commission. D-ID also continually monitors the circumstances surrounding such transfers in order to ensure that these maintain, in practice, a level of protection that is essentially equivalent to the one guaranteed by the GDPR. 
 5. Your privacy rights. How to delete your account 
 1. Rights: The following rights (which may be subject to certain exemptions or derogations) shall apply to certain individuals (some of which only apply to individuals protected by the GDPR):
 You have a right to access Personal Data held about you. Your right of access may normally be exercised free of charge, however we reserve the right to charge an appropriate administrative fee where permitted by applicable law;
 You have the right to request that we rectify any Personal Data we hold that is inaccurate or misleading;
 You have the right to request the erasure/deletion of your Personal Data (e.g. from our records). Please note that there may be circumstances in which we are required to retain your Personal Data, for example for the establishment, exercise or defense of legal claims;
 You have the right to object, to or to request restriction, of the processing;
 You have the right to data portability. This means that you may have the right to receive your Personal Data in a structured, commonly used and machine-readable format, and that you have the right to transmit that data to another controller;
 You have the right to object to profiling;
 You have the right to withdraw your consent at any time. Please note that there may be circumstances in which we are entitled to continue processing your data, in particular if the processing is required to meet our legal and regulatory obligations. Also, please note that the withdrawal of consent shall not affect the lawfulness of processing based on consent before its withdrawal;
 You also have a right to request certain details of the basis on which your Personal Data is transferred outside the European Economic Area, but data transfer agreements and/or other details may need to be partially redacted for reasons of commercial confidentiality;
 You have a right to lodge a complaint with your local data protection supervisory authority (i.e., your place of habitual residence, place or work or place of alleged infringement) at any time or before the relevant institutions in your place of residence. We ask that you please attempt to resolve any issues with us before you contact your local supervisory authority and/or relevant institution.
 2. You can exercise your rights by contacting us at support@d-id.com . You may use an authorized agent to submit a request on your behalf if you provide the authorized agent written permission signed by you. To protect your privacy, we may take steps to verify your identity before fulfilling your request. Subject to legal and other permissible considerations, we will make every reasonable effort to honor your request promptly in accordance with applicable law or inform you if we require further information in order to fulfil your request. When processing your request, we may ask you for additional information to confirm or verify your identity and for security purposes, before processing and/or honoring your request. We reserve the right to charge a fee where permitted by law, for instance if your request is manifestly unfounded or excessive. In the event that your request would adversely affect the rights and freedoms of others (for example, would impact the duty of confidentiality we owe to others) or if we are legally entitled to deal with your request in a different way than initial requested, we will address your request to the maximum extent possible, all in accordance with applicable law. 
 3. Deleting your account: Should you ever decide to delete your account, you may do so over the D-ID Products or by emailing support@d-id.com . If you terminate your account, any association between your account and Personal Data we store will no longer be accessible through your account. However, given the nature of sharing on certain services, any public activity on your account prior to deletion will remain stored on our servers and will remain accessible to the public. 
 4. The rights above apply to our registered customers using the Software.  For clarity, our policy is to respect the above rights, and with respect to any data subject with whom we can associate their Personal Data, all in coordination with you or the relevant customer.      
 6. Use by children 
 We do not offer our products or services for use by children and, therefore, we do not knowingly collect Personal Data from, and/or about children under the age of eighteen (18). If you are under the age of eighteen (18), do not provide any Personal Data to us without involvement of a parent or a guardian. If you believe that we might have any such information, please contact us at support@d-id.com . 
 7. Interaction with third party products 
 We enable you to interact with third party websites, mobile software applications and products or services that are not owned or controlled by us (each a “ Third Party Service ”). We are not responsible for the privacy practices or the content of such Third Party Services. Please be aware that Third Party Services can collect Personal Data from you. Accordingly, we encourage you to read the terms and conditions and privacy policies of each Third Party Service.
 8. Log Files 
 We use log files. Regarding your use of the Website and/or the Software, the information inside the log files includes internet protocol (IP) addresses, type of browser, Internet Service Provider (ISP), date/time stamp, referring/exit pages, clicked pages and any other information your browser may send to us. We use such information to analyze trends, administer the Website and/or Software, track users’ movement around the Website and/or Software, and gather demographic information.
 9. Analytic Tools 
 Google Analytics . The Website uses a tool called “Google Analytics” to collect information about use of the Website. Google Analytics collects information such as how often users visit this Website, what pages they visit when they do so, and what other websites they used prior to coming to this Website. We use the information we get from Google Analytics to maintain and improve the Website and our products. We do not combine the information collected through the use of Google Analytics with personal information we collect. Google’s ability to use and share information collected by Google Analytics about your visits to this Website is restricted by the Google Analytics Terms of Service, available at https://marketingplatform.google.com/about/analytics/terms/us/ , and the Google Privacy Policy, available at https://www.google.com/policies/privacy/ . You may learn more about how Google collects and processes data specifically in connection with Google Analytics at https://www.google.com/policies/privacy/partners/ . You may prevent your data from being used by Google Analytics by downloading and installing the Google Analytics Opt-out Browser Add-on, available at https://tools.google.com/dlpage/gaoptout/ .
 Facebook Custom Audience (Website)
 Firebase Analytics . We also use “ Google Analytics for Firebase ” with respect to the Software. By enabling this tool, we enable the collection of data about Software Users, including via  identifiers for mobile devices , cookies and similar technologies. We use the information we get from Google Analytics for Firebase to maintain and improve our App(s). We do not facilitate the merging of personally-identifiable information with non-personally identifiable information unless we have robust notice of, and your prior affirmative (i.e., opt-in) consent to, that merger. Finally, please note that Google Analytics for Firebase’s terms (available at https://firebase.google.com/terms/ ) shall also apply. 
 Mixpanel . As part of the Software, we collect Personal Data such as your email address and your user activity through the use of Mixpanel. Mixpanel’s ability to use and share information is governed by the Mixpanel Terms of Use, available at  https://mixpanel.com/terms/ , and the Mixpanel Privacy Policy, available at  https://mixpanel.com/privacy/ . You can opt-out of Mixpanel’s services by clicking on the following link: https://mixpanel.com/optout/ .
 Hubspot . As part of the Software, some Personal Data may be used on Hubspot, such as support tickets and contact details.
 ZenDesk . As part of the Software, some Personal Data may be used on ZenDesk, such as support tickets and contact details.
 ZoomInfo . We use ZoomInfo on our website to support visitor analytics and related website functionality. Depending on the enabled ZoomInfo features, this may include WebSights, FormComplete, Schedule, and Chat. In this context, when you visit and browse our website or enter information into forms, we and certain vendors may collect and use data such as your email address, device and browser information, browsing data, and other website interaction data in order to provide certain functionality on our website, analyze which pages were visited, support form-related functionality, and enable scheduling or chat features. The legal basis for this processing, including the storage of and access to cookies on the user’s device, is your consent. As ZoomInfo Enhanced visitor identification is enabled, collected data may also be associated with your identity or used to identify you or your organization.
 We reserve the right to remove or add new analytic tools.
 10. Specific provision applicable under California privacy laws 
 1. Our California Do Not Track Notice : Do Not Track (“DNT”) is a privacy preference that users can set in certain web browsers. Please note that we do not respond to or honor DNT signals or similar mechanisms transmitted by web browsers.
 2. California Privacy Rights : California Civil Code Section 1798.83 permits our customers who are California residents to request certain information regarding our disclosure of Personal Data to third parties for their direct marketing purposes. To make such a request, please send an email to support@d-id.com. Please note that we are only required to respond to one request per customer each year.
 3. Deletion of Content from California Residents : If you are a California resident under the age of 18 and a registered user, California Business and Professions Code Section 22581 permits you to remove content or Personal Data you have publicly posted. If you wish to remove such content or Personal Data and you specify which content or Personal Data you wish to be removed, we will do so in accordance with applicable law. Please be aware that after removal you may not be able to restore removed content. In addition, such removal does not ensure complete or comprehensive removal of the content or Personal Data you have posted and that there may be circumstances in which the law does not require us to enable removal of content.
 11. Applicative data retention 
 We use commercially reasonable efforts to retain non-customer Personal Data and Applicative Data in accordance with the below:
 1. Applicative Data uploaded through the API which is not deleted by the user upon completion of a job (See docs.d-id.com ) is erased automatically: (i) through AWS settings, within 24 hours, (ii) in case of the D-ID Product is Agents, within 72 hours and (iii) in case of Insight Service, within 14 days.
 2.  While in the storage, awaiting processing or deletion, the Applicative Data is not accessed for any purpose, including not accessed for model training.
 3.  Users may set a “persist” flag when uploading the data via the API in which case it will be kept, on an encrypted AWS S3 storage, until erased by the user (See the delete function for every entry in the api doc https://docs.d-id.com/reference/get-started). Knowledge Documents which are uploaded to the Agent, in order to constitute a knowledge base for such Agent and in turn serves as the basis for the response for such Agent’s users, are persistent.
 4.  Users may optionally provide via the API a signed URL pointing to the input data at their AWS S3 storage and optionally provide a signed URL pointing to their AWS S3 storage for placing the result in which case the result is not stored in D-ID’s system.
 5.  Applicative Data uploaded through the web https://studio.d-id.com/ is kept as persistent until erased by the user at the studio website. Data uploaded to the studio will be visible in the studio’s webpage and may be deleted by the user at any time.
 6.  The user may query the SaaS API for all persistent data elements. Those can be erased via the Delete APIs at any time.
 7.  D-ID may delete the information 14 days after contract expiration (including a specific service) and after sending an email notification.
 8.  Data of inactive users, i.e. users who did not log in for a consecutive period of 180 days, will be deleted after 14 days and after sending an email notification.
 9.  Applicative Data may be accessed by authorized operators as a result of a customer support ticket or an operational case service ticket.
 10. D-ID does not backup Customer’s Applicative Data other than as set forth in the Data Retention Policy above.
 12. Contact us 
 If you have any questions, concerns or complaints regarding our compliance with this notice and the data protection laws, or if you wish to exercise your rights, we encourage you to first contact us at support@d-id.com. De-Identification Ltd. 84 Hahashmonaim St., Tel Aviv, Israel.
 Download PDF File
 Product
 Features 
 AI Video Generator 
 AI Agents 
 AI Avatars 
 Agentic Videos 
 Creative Reality™ Studio 
 Video Translate 
 Solutions
 Marketing Suite 
 Sales Solutions 
 Customer Experience 
 Learning & Development 
 Technology
 V4 Expressive Avatars 
 V4 Tech Specs 
 Self-Hosting 
 API documentation 
 API for Developers 
 Integrations 
 Live Portrait 
 Speaking Portrait 
 Natural User Interface 
 Company
 About 
 Ethics 
 Careers 
 Leadership 
 News 
 Partners 
 Resources 
 Blog 
 AI-Info 
 Trust Center 
 Help Center 
 Privacy Policy 
 Contact Sales 
 Pricing
 API 
 Studio 
 Enterprise 
 FAQs 
 FAQ 
 AI Video Glossary 
 Subscribe to our monthly newsletter and other industry updates 
 Facebook 
 Instagram 
 LinkedIn 
 Tiktok 
 Twitter 
 Youtube 
 © All Rights Reserved 2026 D-ID AI Video
 D-ID Privacy Policy 
 Terms of Use 
 Corporation Trust Center, 1209 Orange St., Wilmington, New Castle County, Delaware 19801
 