
=== p1
USE OF BOOMS IN OIL
POLLUTION RESPONSE
TECHNICAL INFORMATION PAPER
3

=== p2
2   
USE OF BOOMS IN OIL POLLUTION RESPONSE
Design principles 
 
Booms are floating barriers designed to perform one or 
more of the following functions:
 
• 	 Oil containment and concentration: surrounding 
floating oil to prevent its spread over the water surface 
and increase its thickness to facilitate recovery; 
• 	 Deflection: diverting the oil to a suitable collection point 
on the shoreline for subsequent removal, for example 
by vacuum trucks, pumps, or other recovery methods;
• 	 Protection: diverting the oil away from economically 
important or biologically sensitive sites such as harbour 
entrances, power station cooling-water intakes, 
mariculture facilities or nature reserves.
 
Booms come in a variety of sizes, materials and designs 
in order to meet the demands of these differing situations 
and environments. They can range from small, inexpensive, 
lightweight models for manual deployment in harbours 
(Figure 1), to large, expensive and robust units for offshore 
use, which may require the use of reels, cranes and 
sizeable vessels to handle them. Booms are available in 
a variety of lengths with couplings to allow sections to be 
combined to the desired overall length. Couplings also 
provide towing and anchoring points. In addition to reels, 
a variety of ancillary equipment such as towing bridles, air 
blowers and anchors may be required.
 
The most important characteristic of a boom is its oil 
containment or deflection capability, determined by its 
behaviour in relation to water movement. All booms normally 
incorporate the following features to enhance this behaviour: 
• 	 freeboard to prevent or reduce splash-over; 
• 	 sub-surface skirt to prevent or reduce escape of oil under 
the boom; 
• 	 flotation in the form of air, foam or other buoyant material; 
• 	 longitudinal tension member (chain or wire) to withstand 
forces from winds, waves and currents;
• 	 ballast to maintain the vertical aspect of the boom. 
 
The majority of boom designs fall into two broad categories: 
 
Curtain Booms – providing a continuous sub-surface 
skirt or flexible screen supported by an air or foam-filled 
flotation chamber usually of circular cross-section (Figures 
2a and 2c).
Fence Booms – generally with a flat cross-section held 
vertically in the water by integral or external buoyancy, 
ballast and bracing struts (Figure 2b).
 
Shore-sealing or beach-sealing booms are also available 
whereby the skirt is replaced by water-filled chambers 
allowing the boom to settle on an exposed shoreline at 
low tide (Figure 2d). Fire boom is specifically constructed 
to withstand the high temperatures generated by burning 
5 Figure 1: Fence boom deflecting oil from moorings.
Introduction
Booms are routinely used to surround and contain oil spilled at sea and to deflect its passage 
away from sensitive resources or towards a recovery point. The success of booming operations 
can be limited by the rapid spread of floating oil and the effects of currents, tides, wind and 
waves. Effective boom design and a well-planned and coordinated response can reduce these 
problems, although in some circumstances the use of any boom might be inappropriate. 
 
This paper describes the principles of boom design and the two main modes of operation, 
namely towing by vessels at sea and mooring in shallow or inshore waters. 

=== p3
   3
TECHNICAL INFORMATION PAPER 3
oil and can be of either fence or curtain design with the 
associated abilities and limitations of these two designs 
in containing oil.
Booms should be sufficiently flexible to follow wave motion 
yet sufficiently rigid to retain as much oil as possible. Some 
designs of fence and solid flotation curtain boom exhibit 
poor wave-following characteristics, causing the freeboard 
to sink below the surface or the skirt to ride between crests 
as a wave passes, allowing oil to escape. Consequently, 
these types of boom should be limited to use in calm waters. 
Although boom systems have been developed for use in 
fast flowing water and others for towing at relatively high 
speeds, most conventional  booms designs are not capable 
of containing oil against water velocities much in excess 
of 0.5 ms-1 (1 knot) acting at right angles to it. In practice, 
the escape velocity for most booms is around 0.35 ms-1 
(0.7 knots) irrespective of skirt depth. The way in which oil 
escapes, and its relationship to water velocity, is as much 
a function of oil type as of boom design. Low viscosity oils 
5 Figure 2a: A solid flotation curtain boom with external ballast.
5 Figure 2b: An external flotation fence boom with external flotation 
and ballast. Mooring points are located at intervals along its 
lower length.
escape at lower velocities than more viscous oils. With 
the former, turbulence in the headwave, caused by high 
currents, shears droplets from the underside of the oil layer 
that then are carried under the boom, a process termed 
‘entrainment’ (Figure 3a). Low viscosity oils are also prone 
to ‘drainage failure’ (Figure 3b), whereby the high currents 
cause droplets to break away from the oil accumulating at 
the boom face, to flow vertically down and under the skirt. 
More viscous oils are less likely to become entrained in 
the water and can form thicker layers at the boom face. 
At a certain critical accumulation thickness, the oil will be 
swept under the boom (Figure 3c).
Besides river and tidal currents, wind and waves can 
generate water movement in excess of the escape velocity, 
as well as causing splash-over of contained oil (Figure 
3d). Very high currents may cause the boom to submerge, 
particularly if insufficient buoyancy is provided (Figure 3e), 
or to plane allowing oil to flow past (Figures 3f and 4). Oil 
escape can also be induced by turbulence along a boom and 
therefore a uniform profile without projections is desirable.
5 Figure 2c: An inflatable curtain boom with a combined ballast 
and tension chain fitted in an integral pocket attached to the 
bottom of the skirt.
5 Figure 2d: Intertidal shore-sealing boom. Upper air inflation 
pocket to allow flotation, lower water filled pockets to provide 
ballast when floating and to ensure a good seal with the substrate 
at low tide.

=== p4
4   
The size and length of boom sections are important 
considerations. The optimum size of a boom is largely 
related to the sea state in which it is to be used. As a 
general rule, the minimum height of freeboard to prevent oil 
splash-over should be selected. The depth of skirt should 
be of similar dimensions. Too high a freeboard may cause 
problems of windage, whereby the freeboard acts as a sail. 
Increasing the depth of the skirt can make the boom more 
prone to drainage failure due to the increasing velocity of 
water passing under the boom. Short sections of boom 
can be easier to handle and can protect the integrity of 
the boom as a whole should one section fail, but these 
advantages must be weighed against the inconvenience 
and difficulty of connecting sections effectively. Connections 
interrupt the boom profile and, wherever possible, should 
not coincide with the point of heaviest oil concentrations. 
The design of connectors should allow easy fastening 
and unfastening during deployment and when the boom 
is in the water. 
 
Many different types of boom connector have been made 
available from manufacturers. While the prevalence of 
Unicon or American Society for Testing and Materials 
(ASTM) standard connectors have reduced the variety, the 
many designs available can cause difficulties when joining 
booms from different sources and care should be taken 
when ordering booms from different suppliers.
Other important characteristics are tensile strength, ease 
and speed of deployment, reliability, weight and cost (Table 
1). It is essential that a boom is sufficiently robust and 
durable for its intended purpose as it will often need to 
tolerate inexpert handling, twisting, large and heavy floating 
debris and abrasion from rocks, dock walls or coral (Figure 
5). Structural strength is required, to withstand the forces 
of water and wind on a boom, when it is either towed or 
moored. Ease and speed of deployment, combined with 
reliability, are clearly very important in a rapidly changing 
situation and may influence the choice made. 
 
Some low-cost booms are designed for single use, 
after which they can be incinerated or returned to the 
manufacturers for recycling. Many of the more expensive, 
robust booms, if properly deployed and maintained, can 
be reused time and time again. Booms usually require 
5 Figure 4: The strong current has caused the boom to plane, 
allowing any oil to be lost under the skirt.
5 Figure 3: Boom failure modes. The arrows indicate current direction. (After a diagram in Oil Spill Science and Technology, courtesy 
Merv Fingas).
USE OF BOOMS IN OIL POLLUTION RESPONSE
5 Figure 3a: Entrainment.
5 Figure 3b: Drainage failure.
5 Figure 3d: Splash-over.
5 Figure 3c: Critical accumulation.
5 Figure 3e: Submergence.
5 Figure 3f: Planing.

=== p5
   5
cleaning after use and this can prove difficult for some 
designs (Figure 6). Steam cleaning or solvents are usually 
employed but when using the latter it is important to ensure 
that the boom fabric is compatible with such chemicals. 
Proper retrieval, maintenance and storage are important 
to prolong the life of a boom and to ensure that it is always 
ready for use at short notice. Some booms, particularly 
self-inflating models, are prone to damage from abrasion 
unless retrieved carefully.  Emergency repair kits should 
be kept on hand for dealing with minor damage, which 
could otherwise make a section or even the whole length 
of boom unusable. Major damage to boom fabric is often 
difficult to repair and may necessitate replacement of the 
whole section. Correct storage of booms is important to 
minimise long-term degradation of the boom material by 
high temperatures, UV light rays or mildew, although this is 
generally less of a problem with more advanced materials 
such as polyurethane or neoprene. Air flotation booms take 
up only a small storage area when deflated, whereas solid 
flotation booms are bulky. This should be considered when 
transporting booms to site and if storage is at a premium, 
such as on board a vessel.
5 Figure 5: A boom can be easily damaged once deployed. Regular 
attention is required to ensure its effectiveness is maintained 
throughout the tidal cycle.
5 Figure 6: Oil trapped behind external floats of fence boom can 
be particularly difficult to clean.
TECHNICAL INFORMATION PAPER 3
5 Table 1: Characteristics of common boom types.
Type of 
Boom
Flotation 
Method
Storage 
Wave       
Following 
Property
Moored 
or 
Towed?
Ease of 
Cleaning
Relative 
Cost
Preferred Use
Curtain 
Boom
Inflatable
Compact 
when 
deflated
Good
Both
Straightforward
High
Inshore or offshore
Solid foam
Bulky
Reasonable
Moored
Easy / Straight-
forward
Mid-range 
to Low
Sheltered inshore 
waters e.g. 
harbours
Fence
Boom
External foam 
floats
Bulky
Poor
Moored
Difficult/Medium; 
oil can become 
trapped behind 
external floatation 
or in the junctions 
of the chambers
Low
Sheltered waters 
(e.g. ports, 
marinas)
Shore-
Sealing 
Boom
Inflatable upper 
chamber, lower 
chambers water 
filled
Compact 
when 
deflated
Good
Moored
Medium; oil can 
become trapped 
in junction of the 
chambers
High
Along sheltered 
intertidal shores (no 
breaking waves)

=== p6
6   
Forces exerted on booms 
 
To estimate the approximate force F (kg) exerted on a boom 
with a sub-surface area A (m²) by a current with velocity V 
(ms-1) the following formula can be used: 
 
F = 100 x A x V²
 
Thus, the approximate force acting on a 100 metre length 
of boom with a 0.6 metre skirt in a 0.25 ms-1 (0.5 knot) 
current would be: 
 
F = 100 x (0.6 x100) x (0.25)² ≈ 375 kg (force) 
 
From the graph in Figure 7, it can be seen that doubling 
the current velocity would entail a four-fold increase in 
load. The approximate force exerted by wind directly on 
the freeboard of the boom can also be considerable. For 
the purpose of estimating this windage, the above formula 
can be used on the basis that roughly equivalent pressures 
are created by a water current and a wind speed 40 times 
greater. For example, the approximate force on a 100 metre 
length of boom with a 0.5 metre freeboard in a 7.5 ms-1 (15 
knots) wind would be: 
 
F = 100 x (0.5 x100) x (7.5/40)² ≈ 175 kg (force) 
 
In the above examples the combined forces of current and 
wind would be approximately 550 kg if they were acting 
in the same direction on a rigid barrier. In practice, the 
boom would be positioned at an angle to the flow forming 
a curve, thereby modifying the magnitude and direction of 
the forces (also see Table 2 on page 9). However, these 
calculations provide a guide to the forces and are an aid to 
the selection of moorings or towing vessels. When a boom 
is towed, its velocity through the water should be entered 
as V in the formula set out in the beginning of this section. 
 
The forces acting on booms from non-breaking waves or 
swell are usually insubstantial. Provided the boom has 
the required degree of flexibility, it can follow the surface 
movement of the water with little consequence. However, 
when a wave breaks against a boom, the resultant 
instantaneous loading may cause the boom to tear if the 
tensional and material strength are insufficient.
 
Deployment of booms
 
The deployment of booms can be a difficult and potentially 
hazardous operation. Poor weather and rough seas impose 
limitations on operations and the handling of wet and 
oily equipment on vessels that are pitching and rolling is 
demanding and can place personnel at risk. Even in ideal, 
calm conditions, it is important that operations are well 
thought out and controlled to minimise these risks and the 
potential for damage to the boom. A suitable strategy should 
be developed as part of the contingency planning process. 
Local conditions, deployment sites, boom types and lengths 
available, appropriate boom configurations and the availability 
of work boats and other resources should be fully considered 
before an incident occurs. In addition, the installation of fixed 
boom mooring points should be considered where appropriate 
and their position noted in a contingency plan. Planning is 
particularly relevant for oil terminals and similar installations 
where both the source and most likely size of spill can be 
predicted. Regular boom deployment exercises should be 
carried out in order that response personnel become fully 
familiar with operational procedures.  
 
Towed booms 
The rapid spread of oil over a large area poses a serious 
challenge to the success of containment and recovery 
operations at sea. In an effort to prevent spreading and 
to contain the oil to maximise the encounter rate for 
skimmers, long booms in U, V or J configurations may be 
towed using two vessels (Figure 8). For example, a 300 
metre towed boom may allow a swath up to 100 metres in 
width to be swept. Suitable recovery devices and sufficient 
on-board storage are crucial to the overall success of the 
operation. Skimmers can be either deployed from one of 
the towing vessels or from a third vessel behind the boom 
(Figure 9). Combined containment and recovery systems, 
with skimmers incorporated into the face of the boom, are 
now rarely deployed due to their ability to recover only a 
limited range of oils and due to their complexity. The use of 
skimmers is covered in greater detail in a separate paper.
 
Oil may more readily escape beneath the inflexible 
connections between boom sections. Consequently, to 
minimise the escape of oil, when towing a sectioned boom 
in either U, V or J configuration, it is important to ensure 
that there are no connectors at the apex of the boom. 
With a U configuration, using an odd number of sections 
of boom will alleviate this problem. To avoid sharp strain or 
5 Figure 7: Forces exerted on a 100 metre length of boom of 
various skirt depths, showing an exponential rise with increasing 
current. 
USE OF BOOMS IN OIL POLLUTION RESPONSE

=== p7
   7
snatching, booms should not be attached directly to towing 
vessels. Instead, towing lines of sufficient length should 
be used between boom ends and the towing vessel with 
lines of 50 metres or more typically appropriate for towing 
a 300 metre length of boom.
 
Boom performance is best judged by observation. Oil lost 
under the boom will appear as globules or droplets rising 
behind the boom. Sheens may be present even with good 
boom performance. Vortex formations behind the boom 
imply that it is being towed too fast. 
 
To maximise performance, vessels should be able to 
maintain both the correct configuration of the towed booms 
and the desired very low speeds through the water, i.e. 
at less than the escape velocity. This means that each 
of the two towing vessels will require at least half the 
total power necessary to tow the boom at the maximum 
speed consistent with oil retention and should be able to 
manoeuver sufficiently at slow speeds. As a guide, each 
rated horse-power of an inboard engine corresponds to the 
ability to provide a pull of 20 kg force. Twin propulsion units, 
bow and stern thrusters and variable pitch propellers are 
valuable. In addition, an open and low aft deck working area 
with winch, lifting gear or a boom reel are necessary when 
handling bulky and heavy booms. However, experience 
has shown that the exposed nature of the deck on such 
vessels can make conditions hazardous for crew in heavy 
sea conditions. 
The ideal towing point aboard the vessel will need to be 
found by experiment and may need to be altered according 
to the course and wind direction. For example, a single 
screw vessel towing from the stern will have difficulty 
manoeuvering, and towing from a forward point of the ship 
is preferable. Good communication between the two towing 
5 Figure 8: Inflatable boom deployed in a U configuration between 
two vessels to contain a heavy crude oil. Recovery of the oil 
will bring the operation to a successful conclusion.
5 Figure 9: Curtain boom employed in a V configuration by two 
towing vessels with a separate skimming vessel at the apex. 
5 Figure 10: Single ship collection system employing a short length 
of curtain boom deployed from an oil recovery catamaran, in 
heavily emulsified crude oil. 
5 Figure 11: Whilst sufficiently flexible to be able to follow the 
motion of the waves, the boom has risen from the water where 
it attaches to the hull, potentially allowing oil to escape from 
the apex.
TECHNICAL INFORMATION PAPER 3

=== p8
8   
5 Figure 12: Inflatable boom moored around a partially sunken 
wreck to contain any potential leakage of bunker fuel.
5 Figure 13: Curtain boom deployed in front of a power station 
cooling-water intake. 
vessels must be maintained so that both move at the same 
speed and in a controlled and coordinated manner. Aircraft 
equipped with air-to-sea communications could also be 
used to coordinate the movement and activities of vessels 
and direct them to the thickest areas of oil.  
 
A single vessel may perform the multiple roles of oil 
containment, collection, separation and storage. Either 
a flexible boom attached to an outrigger (Figure 10) or 
a rigid sweeping arm can be used to contain and enable 
collection of the oil. With all vessel-based containment 
and recovery systems, oil can be lost from boom that is 
rigidly attached to the vessel in swell (Figure 11). Single 
vessel systems are more flexible than the more complex 
multi-ship approach, although the oil encounter width or 
swath is limited, being similar to the vessel’s beam. If the 
swath is too great, the set-up can become cumbersome 
and prone to damage in rough weather. This limitation on 
the swath may be less significant when floating oil has 
been driven into narrow windrows.
The limitations on boom performance, combined with 
additional constraints on the use of skimmers, mean 
containment and recovery operations at sea will, in most 
cases, be only partially successful.
Moored booms 
In rare circumstances it can be appropriate to anchor booms 
to contain spilled oil close to a source such as a leaking 
vessel (Figure 12). However, waters may be too exposed 
and currents too strong for moored booms to be effective 
and anchoring booms in deeper water may be difficult. In 
addition, placing booms close to the source may create a 
fire hazard and interfere with attempts to stem the flow of 
oil or to salve the vessel. Even in calm conditions, large 
instantaneous discharges of oil can easily swamp a boom, 
rendering it ineffective. This is especially true for light oils, 
which will normally dissipate naturally and more effectively 
without booming. 
 
More frequently, booms are deployed close to shore 
to protect sensitive areas such as estuaries, marshes, 
mangroves, amenity areas and water intakes (Figure 13). 
In practice, it may not be possible to protect all such sites. 
Careful planning should therefore be devoted to identifying 
first those areas that can be boomed effectively, and second, 
placing these in order of priority.
 
An aerial survey can be valuable in identifying potentially 
suitable sites for using booms, including access points. In 
selecting a location and method of deployment it may be 
necessary to compromise between conflicting requirements. 
For instance, although it may be desirable to protect a 
complete river, the estuary may be too wide or the currents 
too strong to achieve this, particularly if there is appreciable 
tidal influence. Strong outflow from rivers or estuaries may 
negate the need to deploy booms against oil approaching 
from the sea. 
 
Where necessary, a more suitable location may have to 
be sought further upstream, bearing in mind the need 
for access to deploy the boom and remove the collected 
oil. If the oil is not removed at the rate of its arrival at the 
inshore position, it will accumulate and move out towards 
the centre of the river where the stronger currents may 
sweep the oil under the boom. 
 
It is frequently better to use booms to deflect oil to relatively 
quiet waters (Figure 14) where it may be recovered rather 
than attempt containment. As shown in Table 2, it is feasible 
to deflect floating oil even in a 1.5 ms-1 current (3 knots) 
where a boom positioned at right angles to the flow would 
fail to contain any oil. Following this principle, a river can 
be protected by placing a boom obliquely to the direction 
of flow. To maintain a navigation channel or to deflect oil 
from one side of a river to another for ease of collection, 
two sections of boom can be staggered from opposite 
banks taking into account reversal of tidal flow. 
 
Correct mooring of the boom is crucial since performance 
is dependent upon the angle of deflection remaining 
appropriate to the prevailing current strength. To maintain 
this angle and prevent the formation of pockets in the boom 
that will trap oil, frequent anchoring points may be required, 
USE OF BOOMS IN OIL POLLUTION RESPONSE

=== p9
   9
although the laying of multiple moorings may be impractical 
in an emergency. The formula to determine forces on page 
6 can be used together with Tables 2 and 3 as a guide to 
the minimum size and number of moorings required to hold 
a boom in a current of known strength and taking the likely 
maximum wind effect into account. Whilst a Danforth-type 
or fluked anchor is effective on sand and mud substrates 
(Figure 15), a fisherman’s type or hook anchor is better on 
rocky bottoms. If time is available, concrete blocks can be 
cast to give convenient and reliable mooring points, but 
their weight in air must be at least three times the expected 
load, to compensate for their buoyancy in sea water. The 
use of a workboat with lifting gear would be required to 
handle heavy moorings.
 
Whichever type of mooring is used, it is important to select 
the length of the mooring lines to suit the expected water 
depth, swell and tidal range (Figure 16). If the lines are 
too short the boom will not ride well in the water and the 
snatching produced in the lines by waves may dislodge the 
moorings or damage the booms. Conversely, if the lines 
are too long it will be difficult to control the configuration. A 
length of heavy chain between the anchor and line greatly 
improves the holding power of an anchor, and the use of 
an intermediate buoy between the boom and anchor will 
5 Figure14: Boom used as a spur to deflect oil to the shore for 
recovery (© Norwegian Coastal Administration).
5 Figure 15: Typical boom mooring arrangement. The same 
system would be employed at regular intervals along the boom. 
help prevent submersion of the end of the boom. Equally, 
a weight hung from the mooring lines stops them floating 
on the surface when slack. 
 
Magnetic mooring points allow boom to be attached directly 
to a ship side. Sliding moorings allow vertical movement 
of a boom throughout the tidal cycle when attached to a 
predetermined point such as at a harbour entrance.
When deploying a boom from a shoreline it is often possible 
to make use of fixed objects on the shore such as trees or 
rocks. On a featureless shoreline, multiple stakes (Figure 
17) or a buried object such as a log provides an excellent 
mooring point. Water-ballasted beach- or shore-sealing 
booms are most suitable for deployment in this environment 
as their design enables containment during the tidal cycle. 
However, care should be taken when positioning these 
booms prior to ballasting as they are difficult to manhandle 
on land once filled (Figure 18). Such booms are often used 
in conjunction with curtain boom.
 
The outcome of the considerations above can be combined 
into a site specific booming plan, which identifies mooring 
points, oil collection points, access routes and the length 
and type of boom for the particular location. Before such 
plans are incorporated into local contingency plans, they 
should be subject to practical verification trials under a 
range of tidal conditions so that there can be confidence 
that the arrangements will perform as expected. 
TECHNICAL INFORMATION PAPER 3
5 Table 2: Maximum deployment angles to flow direction at 
different current strengths for bottom tension booms to prevent 
escape of oil Calculations are based on an escape velocity of 
0.7 knots (0.35 m/s) at 90°.
5 Table 3: Holding strength of Danforth type anchors in loose 
mud, sand or gravel, and clay.
Current Strength
Max. Angle
(knots)
(m/s)
(degrees)
0.7
0.35
90
1.0
0.5
45
1.5
0.75
28
2.0
1.0
20
2.5
1.25
16
3.0
1.5
13
Anchor
Holding Stength (kg force)
Weight 
(kg)
Mud
Sand
Clay
15
200
250
300
25
350
400
500
35
600
700
700

=== p10
10   
 As winds, currents and tides change, so will the configuration 
of a boom. Frequent checks and re-adjustment of the 
moorings will be necessary and contained oil and debris 
must be removed promptly, since the performance and 
benefit of the boom will otherwise be severely reduced. 
In conditions where the air temperature is hot by day and 
cool by night it is important to allow for the expansion and 
contraction of air in inflatable booms. This may necessitate 
releasing air during the day and re-inflating at night. Booms 
are vulnerable to damage by passing vessels, particularly 
at night and precautions, such as notifying mariners and 
marking booms with warning lights, can help to prevent 
such damage. Brightly coloured booms are more visible in 
daylight and are better picked out by lights at night. 
 
As well as using booms to intercept or deflect oil they can 
be used in sheltered areas, where oil has collected naturally, 
to prevent it moving should conditions change (Figure 19). 
5 Figure 16: Use of an insufficiently long mooring line has caused 
the boom to become suspended at low tide, allowing oil to pass 
beneath. Regular adjustment of lines would be required to 
maintain the boom in an effective position throughout the tidal 
cycle. Sliding moorings would be more effective in this scenario.
5 Figure 17: Mooring stakes to hold boom in place on shoreline 
without trees or other natural anchors.
5 Figure 18: Shoreline sealing boom deployed in an estuary. The 
lower water ballast chambers allow the boom to sit on the shore 
at low tide. In this instance, sections of shoreline sealing boom 
are connected to sections of inflatable curtain boom.
5 Figure 19: Semi-solid oil held against the shoreline by a section 
of inflatable boom to facilitate recovery.
This not only minimises the extent of the contamination 
but also allows the controlled removal of the trapped oil. 
Booms can also assist shoreline clean-up by containing 
oil washed off beaches and rocks, for example by flushing 
or pressure washing operations. By drawing in the boom, 
the oil can be concentrated and moved towards collection 
devices. In some circumstances, simple expendable sorbent 
booms can be used to collect thin oil films although their use 
should be tightly controlled. The use of sorbent materials 
is addressed in a separate paper.
Alternative systems
 
Bubble barriers have been permanently installed to protect 
harbours, where currents are relatively low and where floating 
booms would hinder vessel movement. A rising curtain of 
bubbles is produced when air is pumped into a perforated 
USE OF BOOMS IN OIL POLLUTION RESPONSE

=== p11
pipe located on the sea-bed. The air bubbles create a counter-
current on the surface that holds the oil against a water flow 
of up to 0.35 ms-1 (0.7 knots). However, their effectiveness 
is limited to thin layers of oil in calm conditions as even a 
slight wind can cause oil to escape. Even simple systems 
require substantial compressors to provide sufficient air. 
Regular checks of such systems are essential to ensure 
that the air holes in the perforated pipes are not blocked by 
silt or marine organisms. 
 
When purpose-built equipment is unavailable, oil may be 
contained or collected with improvised systems made with 
locally available materials. Alternative moored booms can be 
constructed from wood, oil drums, inflated fire hoses, rubber 
Key points
 
•	 Determine priorities for protection in order to maximise effective use of available booms. 
•	 Decide whether selected areas can be protected by either towed or moored booms.
•	 Obtain as much information as possible on currents, tides and winds.
•	 Calculate forces likely to be exerted on booms.
•	 Review available boom designs and select the best for the conditions of expected use.
•	 Consider reliability, ease, speed of deployment and arrangements for suitable storage, 
maintenance and repair.
•	 Select suitable vessels for towing and consider necessary logistics to support operations 
at sea.
•	 Identify locations for successful boom deployment and develop and verify booming plans 
for incorporation in national and local contingency plans.
•	 Thoroughly train personnel and maintain their skills by practical exercises.
•	 Appreciate the limitations of booms in containing oil and be aware of the need to improvise 
as required.
tyres or fishing nets filled with straw (Figure 20). In shallow 
waters stakes may be driven into the bottom to support 
screens or mats made from sacking, reeds, bamboo or other 
such materials (Figure 21). In these instances, the boom or 
barrier may also act as a sorbent to assist recovery of the oil.
 
On long sandy beaches, sand bars can be built out into 
shallow water with bulldozers to intercept oil moving along 
the shoreline or to prevent oil entering narrow estuaries 
or lagoons. However, such measures should be used 
with caution as they require considerable effort, can be 
rapidly washed away by currents or successive tides and
could possibly damage the structure or ecology of the 
beach.
   11
5 Figure 20: Improvised boom constructed from netting and straw. 
While not expected to survive more than one tidal cycle, this 
may nevertheless serve to reduce contamination of the shoreline 
from incoming floating oil. 
5 Figure 21: Barrier constructed from oyster-shells, held in place 
by stakes and nets. 
TECHNICAL INFORMATION PAPER 3

=== p12
© 2011 ITOPF Ltd. Produced by Impact PR & Design Limited, Canterbury, UK.
TECHNICAL INFORMATION PAPERS
1	
Aerial Observation of Marine Oil Spills 
2	
Fate of Marine Oil Spills
3	
Use of Booms in Oil Pollution Response
4	
Use of Dispersants to Treat Oil Spills
5	
Use of Skimmers in Oil Pollution Response
6	
Recognition of Oil on Shorelines
7	
Clean-up of Oil from Shorelines
8	
Use of Sorbent Materials in Oil Spill
Response
9	
Disposal of Oil and Debris
10	 Leadership, Command & Management of
Oil Spills
11	 Effects of Oil Pollution on Fisheries and
Mariculture
12	 Effects of Oil Pollution on Social and 
Economic Activities
13	 Effects of Oil Pollution on the Environment
14	 Sampling and Monitoring of Marine Oil Spills
15	 Preparation and Submission of Claims from 
Oil Pollution
16	 Contingency Planning for Marine Oil Spills
17	 Response to Marine Chemical Incidents
ITOPF is a not-for-profit organisation established on behalf of the world’s shipowners and their insurers to promote effective 
response to marine spills of oil, chemicals and other hazardous substances. Technical services include emergency response, 
advice on clean-up techniques, pollution damage assessment, assistance with spill response planning and the provision of 
training. ITOPF is a source of comprehensive information on marine oil pollution and this paper is one of a series based on 
the experience of ITOPF’s technical staff. Information in this leaflet may be reproduced with the prior express permission of 
ITOPF. For further information please contact: 
ITOPF Ltd
1 Oliver’s Yard, 55 City Road, London EC1Y 1HQ, United Kingdom
Tel: 
+44 (0)20 7566 6999 
Fax: 
+44 (0)20 7566 6950
24hr: 
+44 (0)20 7566 6998 
E-mail: central@itopf.org 
Web:  www.itopf.org
