=== PAGE 1 ===
 
G. PECORA 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
CASE STUDY: COMPOSTING TOILET SYSTEMS  
IN THE UNITED STATES 
GABRIELLE PECORA 
November 19, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SYSTEM MANUFACTURERS STUDIED: 
• CLIVUS MULTRUM 
• SUN-MAR 
• COMPOSTING TOILET SYSTEMS, INC.  
• SANCOR INDUSTRIES, LTD. 
• ADVANCED COMPOSTING SYSTEMS, LLC. 
 
FACILITIES STUDIED: 
• UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA, C.K. CHOI BUILDING 
Vancouver, Canada 
• CALVIN COLLEGE, BUNKER INTREPRETIVE CENTER Grand Rapids, 
MI 
• BRONX ZOO, ECO-BATHROOM Bronx, NY 
• SOUTHFACE ECO-OFFICE Atlanta, GA 
• MOUNTAIN EQUIPMENT CO-OP Winnipeg, Canada 
• BAR-T MOUNTAINSIDE CAMP Urbana, MD 
• STREETWATER CREEK VISITOR CENTER Atlanta, GA 
• THE ECHOES HARRISON RIVER RETREAT British Columbia, Canada 
• RED PINE WILDNERNESS LODGE Ontario, Canada 
• RAYSTOWN FIELD STATION, SHUSTER HALL Huntingdon, PA 
• ORGAN PIPE CACTUS NATIONAL MONUMENT Ajo, AZ 
• COTTONWOOD CAMPGROUND Coconino, AZ 
• WOLF EDUCATION AND RESEARCH CENTER Winchester, ID 
 
PUBLICATIONS: 
• Hill, Geoffrey B. & Baldwin, Susan A. (2012). Vermicomposting toilets, an 
alternative to latrine style microbial composting toilets, prove far superior in 
mass reduction, pathogen destruction, compost quality, and operational cost. 
Waste Management, 32, 1811-1820. 

=== PAGE 2 ===
 
G. PECORA 
 
2 
 
PURPOSE & SCOPE: 
 
 
This case study was compiled to use as reference and comparison of existing composting 
toilet systems and manufacturers in the United States and Canada. Information was 
collected through phone conversations, online information and email correspondence. 
Confidential information is denoted in underlined italics and should be handled 
sensitively and considered for internal use only as requested by the supplier of the 
information. 
 
The purpose of this work is to establish the advantages and disadvantages of existing 
decentralized compost toilet systems. This information can be used to compare with and 
support the centralized Thermopile Project composting system.  
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: 
 
 
Five composting toilet manufacturers were reviewed for this case study, four of which 
were explored further by studying facilities that have implemented their systems and 
technologies. In total, thirteen facilities were studied comprising of commercial office 
buildings, state park visitor centers, colleges, universities, retail stores, lodges, 
campgrounds, and a zoo. Seven facilities have implemented Clivus Multrum systems, 
three have implemented Composting Toilet Systems, Inc., two have implemented Sun-
Mar systems and one has implemented Advanced Composting Systems LLC 
technologies. Of the thirteen facilities, only two have utilized both the liquid and solid 
compost, two have utilized only the solid compost and one has utilized only the liquid 
compost. Several system users have discovered that the temperatures necessary for 
pathogen reduction are never achieved, thus causing fecal coliform levels to be above the 
allotted amount for land application. Facilities that do not utilize their compost due to the 
lack of pathogen reduction must contract local sanitation companies for removal of their 
compost for further treatment or are connected directly to the sewer. Very few of these 
systems perform as they are advertised and require additional disposal costs including 
connection to local sewers, manual removal, or in some cases, system replacement.  
 
These cases reinforce the point made by Geoff Hill and Susan Baldwin that composting 
both urine and fecal material together on a decentralized scale is not effective at 
achieving necessary temperatures for pathogen reduction. Although Hill and Baldwin 
encourage source separating vermicomposting toilets, they conclude that decentralized 
mixed latrine composting toilets are not sufficient and this process would need to be done 
in a centralized location in order to achieve temperatures necessary for pathogen 
reduction. Hill and Baldwin’s article Vermicomposting toilets, an aternative to latrine 
style microbial composting toilets, prove far superior in mass reduction, pathogen 
destruction, compost quality and operational cost is reviewed in the Publications section 
of this case study.  

=== PAGE 3 ===
 
G. PECORA 
 
3 
 
 
SYSTEM MANUFACTURERS 
 
CLIVUS MULTRUM, INC. 
www.clivusmultrum.com  
 
Clivus Multrum originated in Sweden in 1939 and is possibly the largest and oldest 
manufacturer in the world of composting toilet systems. They market their systems as 
being able to eliminate all harmful pathogens from human waste where the finished solid 
compost can be used in home gardens and the liquid compost, mixed with water can be 
used to irrigate flowers, trees and grass. Clivus Multrum offers waterless, micro-flush and 
vacuum flush systems appropriate for a wide variety of uses. Clivus Multrum also 
provides graywater recycling design and the systems themselves. 
 
The majority of facilities studied in this Case Study implement Clivus Multrum systems. 
 
 
SUN-MAR 
www.sun-mar.com  
 
Sun-Mar composting toilets have been a family-owned business in North America since 
1971 and were the first to introduce the self-contained composting unit that could 
compost and evaporate liquid all in one chamber in the bathroom. Sun-Mar is also 
responsible for the first composting toilet with a rotating drum. Sun-Mar offers 22 
composting toilet models, many of which utilize their international patented rotating 
drum technology. 
 
Sun-Mar offers non-electric (NE) models, central flush systems, central dry systems and 
self contained systems. 
 
Two facilities were studied in this Case Study that implement Sun-Mar systems. 
 
 
COMPOSTING TOILET SYSTEMS, INC. 
www.comtoilet.com  
 
Composting Toilet Systems, Inc. (CTS) has been in business manufacturing and 
distributing composting toilet systems since 1978 in North America. CTS is a distributor 
of Sun-Mar composting toilets as well as CTS brand toilets.  
 
Several facilities that utilize CTS systems were studied in this Case Study. 
 
ADVANCED COMPOSTING SYSTEMS, LLC. 
www.compostingtoilet.com  
 

=== PAGE 4 ===
 
G. PECORA 
 
4 
 
Advanced Composting Systems, LLC. (ACS) is an American manufacturer of the 
Phoenix Composting Toilet System. This company advertises that finished compost can 
classify under the EPA standards as a Class B Biosolid and used for land application as 
defined under 40 CFR 503, Standards for the Use and Disposal of Sewage Sludge. The 
contact at ACS believes that the County Health Departments are the normal regulating 
agencies for composted human waste, but their tests show that fecal coliform levels are 
completely eliminated or extremely low. 
 
One facility using ACS systems were studied in this Case Study. Others were contacted 
but not reached for further information. 
 
[Contact at ACS: Ried, Sales Associate, ried@compostingtoilet.com, (406) 862-3854] 
 
 
SANCOR INDUSTRIES, LTD. 
www.sancor.ca  
 
Sancor Industries, Ltd. has manufactured and marketed advanced composting systems in 
Northern America under the brands Santerra Green and Envirolet. Santerra Green 
composting toilets are sold at retailers such as Sears, Lowe’s, Home Hardware etc.. 
Envirolet is a line that is sold factory direct as an alternative to septic tank systems in 
homes, cottages or cabins. 
 
Both Santerra Green and Envirolet offer waterless, low flush and vacuum flush systems 
and have lifetime replacement warranties, and a 5-year internal part warranty. All 
systems have the option of installing a one or two-tank composting unit. In a one-tank 
composting unit, a drain can either divert liquid waste to a leach field or for a family of 
four or less, can drain the leachate directly into the soil. In a two-tank composting unit, 
the liquid waste is diverted to another tank where it is evaporated and composted 
separately.  
 
Specific facilities using these systems were not covered in this case study as their 
products are marketed mostly for residential use. Various phone conversations divulged 
further information not listed on their website. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 5 ===
 
G. PECORA 
 
5 
 
FACILITIES STUDIED 
 
 
CLIVUS MULTRUM, INC. 
 
C.K. CHOI BUILDING 
UNIVERISTY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA 
Vancouver, Canada 
 
10 M28 Waterless Composting Toilets & 3 Unsealed Urinals 
 
The C.K. Choi Building is a LEED certified building on the campus of UBC. It houses 
the Institute for Asian Research. Originally, the C.K. Choi building was designed so that 
liquid waste would filter through the solid compost and accumulate in a graywater trench 
where it was then use for irrigation. Finished compost was intended for land application 
to the gardens around the building.  
 
In 2011, Geoff Hill, a research student at the university, discovered that the fecal 
coliform levels in both the solid and liquid finished compost were much higher than 
expected, and much higher than provincial regulations would allow. Upon consultation 
with an expert that was contracted by the University to oversee a graywater and 
blackwater treatment facility on campus, the University was convinced they were not 
complying with provincial regulations. This discovery halted the application and use of 
both the solid and liquid compost from the composting toilet systems. Liquid waste is 
now being drained to the local sewer and solid waste will be deposited in a sanitary 
landfill when necessary.  
 
It has been reported that temperatures have never reached the necessary temperatures 
required for pathogen destruction and it has been discussed to replace these systems 
altogether. Another issue with the composting system in the C.K. Choi building was 
odor. According to a Vancouver Coastal Health (VCH) -Environmental Health 
Department Officer, this problem was solved by keeping windows open year round. This 
officer also mentioned that leachate in the basement was becoming a problem but did not 
intervene. 
 
According to UBC, the same odor problem VCH mentioned is only a concern when 
someone opens the composting drawer and breaks the vacuum seal which pulls the odor 
from the restroom in the building down to the composting units in the basement.  
 
UBC comprises such a large surface area of Vancouver it is considered its own entity in 
many applications. The City of Vancouver does not have jurisdiction over the campus. 
Vancouver Coastal Health Department does oversee UBC activities. UBC is also subject 
to compliance under the Provincial Building Codes. 
 

=== PAGE 6 ===
 
G. PECORA 
 
6 
 
The Ministry of Health, which Vancouver Coastal Health is a subdivision of, does not 
have regulations pertaining to composting toilets. They are more concerned with 
graywater, which in British Columbia, is the same as blackwater. The building codes that 
redefine the difference between black and graywater are currently evolving. The Ministry 
of the Environment is currently exploring and evolving their regulations on how to 
dispose of composted human waste as well. 
 
 
 
BUNKER INTERPRETIVE CENTER 
CALVIN COLLEGE 
Grand Rapids, MI 
 
3 Foam-Flush Composting Toilets 
 
The Bunker Interpretive Center is a study-center at Calvin College and an education 
center for the general public. This building is LEED certified, and located in Grand 
Rapids, Michigan, the LEED certified capital of the world. When installing the 
composting toilet systems, regulations required that a backup drainage field be 
constructed onsite in the case of excess of liquid waste. The drainage field was installed 
in 2004 along with the composting toilet system and has not needed to be used yet. The 
Center also has a graywater recycling system. 
 
The City of Grand Rapids and Kent County have strict regulations pertaining to the 
disposal of composted human waste. Land application is not approved so liquid compost 
is pumped out by a local sewage company and in the 8 years the system has been in use, 
the solid compost has not needed to be removed. 
 
Because of the remote location of the Center, usage is inconsistent which the 
management has attributed to the higher than preferred E. coli levels in the compost. The 
liquid compost accumulates quickly and removal is required often. Other than these 
issues, no other system problems have been reported. 
 
 
 
ECO-BATHROOM 
BRONX ZOO 
Bronx, NY 
 
14 toilets and 4 foam flushing urinals 
 
The Bronx Zoo has turned a normal bathroom experience, into an interactive learning 
one. With signs regarding water usage, waste management and conservation, users learn 
the advantages of using the foam flush, composting toilets. The composters sit in a 12-
foot basement and contain a starting material which consists of red worms, fungi and 
bacteria.  

=== PAGE 7 ===
 
G. PECORA 
 
7 
 
 
The Eco-Bathroom was built seven years ago, and according to Clivus Multrum, solid 
compost will not be ready to be removed until eight to ten years after installation. The 
liquid waste is held in a 100-gallon tank, which is removed by a local cesspool company 
once a month. In the warmer months, the liquid waste is removed twice a month because 
of odor. The biggest problem the Eco-Bathroom has is odor, which they attribute to the 
liquid waste, not the solid.  
 
In addition to the composting toilet systems, the graywater is recycled and used to irrigate 
the Graywater Garden, located adjacent to the Eco-Bathroom. Irrigation is performed 
using sub-soil drip lines. 
 
The only major problem reported due to a storm that caused the basement housing the 
composters to flood. This made the composters float off the floor and move, therefore 
breaking all the pipes and causing quite a mess. This was remedied by bolting the units to 
the floor in the basement. 
 
Clivus Multrum maintains the systems while maintenance at the Bronx Zoo is responsible 
for cleaning only. All system malfunctions and issues are handled by Clivus Multrum. 
 
 
 
SOUTHFACE ECO OFFICE 
SOUTHFACE INC. 
Atlanta, GA 
 
Foam-Flush Composting Toilets 
 
Southface’s Eco Office is part of a non-profit organization that promotes comfortable 
energy, resource and water efficient homes, workplaces and communities in the South 
East. The Eco Office is a demonstration and learning tool for other projects to use and 
explore efficient technologies.  
 
The toilets are flushed with collected rainwater and the composters are equipped with 
sawdust and redworms that have been successfully maintained and running for 3 to 4 
years. Solid compost has not yet needed to be emptied from the composters and liquid 
compost is collected and used for irrigation through sub-soil drip lines onsite. In speaking 
with the Facilities and Operations Manager, Chris Theal, the building may have benefited 
from smaller composting units and waterless systems. A hollow shaft fixture would have 
been preferable, according to Theal, but were sold on the fixture design and the “self-
cleaning” marketing of the foam-flush. He mentioned also that the “self-cleaning” 
advertisment is not completely true, and to keep a toilet brush handy and sometimes extra 
water is needed. Theal believes that the system is too large for the limited amount of 
users and therefore has slowed the finished compost production. According to Theal, the 
composters are more so composters of the woodchips and sawdust that they truck in, not 

=== PAGE 8 ===
 
G. PECORA 
 
8 
 
the human waste. The composting unit has a separator for finished compost and raw 
material. 
 
The liquid compost tea is held in a holding tank and is valued as a great plant fertilizer. 
The tea however, contains the bubbles and soapy residue from the foam-flushing 
mechanism, which is an alkaline solution. Irrigation using this alkali tea has killed and 
prevented growth of some plants. The Eco Office is looking into agricultural methods to 
return to a more neutral soil pH. 
 
When the building was first designed, the engineers thought that they could run fresh air 
through a heat exchange using the hot, humid air from the composting room for building 
air circulation. They quickly found this to cause a strong odor through their air vents and 
quickly disconnected. The rooftop patio and garden was also subject to odor, but was 
quickly resolved by extending the vent pipe by 20 feet. 
 
This project was one of the first of its kind in Atlanta and required special permitting to 
be approved. The county health department caught wind of a tour guide advertising that 
compost tea was being used for spray irrigation, they inspected the site, and eventually 
left them alone after realizing this was not the case. 
 
Overall, the Eco Office is very happy with their system, they love it and works great. 
They are very interested in our project implementing composting systems in California 
and would love to be updated on our progress.  
 
 
 
MOUNTAIN EQUIPMENT CO-OP 
Winnipeg, Canada 
 
Waterless Composting Toilet 
 
Mountain Equipment Co-Op is a climbing and outdoors equipment retailer in Winnipeg, 
Canada. Their store contains a waterless composting toilet that was originally intended to 
provide liquid fertilizer to their rooftop garden. This fertilizing system is no longer being 
practiced according to the store manager. The only problems that have been reported 
have been attributed to neglect in maintenance due to the high turnover rate of employees 
(as common in a retail environment). Currently, the system seems to be getting back to a 
healthy state after failing.   
 
 
 
BAR-T MOUNTAINSIDE CAMP 
Urbana, MD 
 
Several waterless composting toilets 
 

=== PAGE 9 ===
 
G. PECORA 
 
9 
 
The Bar-T Mountainside Camp is a summer camp and before and after school care 
facility. There are composting toilets dispersed throughout the camp for use by staff and 
campers. 
 
The liquid compost is used in gardens and landscape around the area through spray 
irrigation out the back of a tractor. The solid compost has not yet needed to be removed 
from the composters. The camp has not encountered any major problems with the 
composting toilet systems and is relatively low maintenance. In addition to the 
composting toilet systems, the camp has a graywater recycling system that uses sub-soil 
irrigation to water wildflower fields in the camp. 
 
The county regulates the composting and graywater systems and inspects the site on a 
quarterly basis. While installing the composting toilet systems, the camp was required to 
install the necessary equipment should they choose to switch over to a conventional 
septic system in the future. 
 
Overall, the camp is very happy with the system. 
 
 
 
SWEETWATER CREEK VISITOR CENTER 
SWEETWATER CREEK STATE PARK 
Lithia Springs, GA 
 
Foam-Flush composting toilets 
 
The Sweetwater Creek Visitor Center is located in the Sweetwater Creek State Park in 
Georgia. The composting toilet systems have been installed for 6 years. Their system 
collects rainwater and uses it for flushing.  
 
Their compost tea system is very unique. The liquid compost drains through the bottom 
of the composters and is mixed with graywater underground in a 1000-gallon septic tank 
where suspended particles are removed from the solution. Liquid waste then moves on to 
a 1000-gallon dosing tank and then pumped into the sub-soil irrigation system. Diulting 
the compost tea with graywater allows for more frequent irrigation using the compost tea. 
In the 6 years the systems have been in place, solid compost has yet to be removed. 
 
Only minor problems have arisen so far, and Clivus Multrum has flown people down to 
Georgia to fix these problems. These problems were not specified. The worst problem so 
far was a fruit fly infestation that must have laid eggs in the composter because a swarm 
of fruit flies flew out of the system and clogged the air vents going to the outside of the 
building. They cleaned the air vents and the problem was resolved.  
 
To the best of their knowledge, the compost tea/graywater irrigation practice is not 
regulated. The Water & Sewer Authority was involved in the regulations required for 
installation of the system. 

=== PAGE 10 ===
 
G. PECORA 
 
10 
 
 
 
SUN-MAR 
 
THE ECHOES 
HARRISON RIVER RETREAT 
Harrison Hot Springs, British Columbia, Canada 
 
The Echos is a bed and breakfast type retreat with 12 cabins. Family owned and operated, 
they have installed at least 12 waterless composting toilets in the cabins and are very 
happy with the systems.  
 
This B&B is a seasonal retreat, where peak months are March through November. During 
the off season, which coincides with the colder months, the composters are left 
unmaintained and the contents in the composters turn white and appears as though they 
are growing mold. Once a year, the solid compost is removed and dumped into the septic 
system. The liquid waste is constantly drained into the septic system through a drain at 
the bottom of each composter. I spoke with the owner of the Echos and she expressed her 
concern in using the finished solid compost on her lawn because she is concerned that her 
dogs would dig in it and is not confident that it was safe for them. 
 
The Echos is unsure of any regulatory matters pertaining to their practices, they were told 
when they installed the systems that the regulations were changing but would not be put 
in place until long after their system would be up and running. They have not returned to 
the issue since installation. 
 
One thing the owner mentioned that she strongly dislikes about the system is that once a 
year when the weather gets hot, fly larvae ends up in the compost and flies hatch and take 
over the cabins. Sun-Mar told her to spray a chemical in the composting units to kill 
larvae, but then consequently, disrupts the composting environment and adds toxic 
chemicals to the mix. 
 
[After some further research, I found that several Sun-Mar systems have experienced this 
problem. One site attributed it to the design that diverts most liquid waste away from 
solid waste, Sun-mar claims it is caused when operators add topsoil to the composting 
unit, which often contains fly larvae.] 
 
 
 
RED PINE WILDNERNESS LODGE 
Ontario, Canada 
 
The Red Pine Wilderness Lodge is bed and breakfast-type lodge equipped with at least 12 
non-electric low flush toilets.  
 

=== PAGE 11 ===
 
G. PECORA 
 
11 
 
Overall, the Lodge is very happy with the systems and the only problems they have 
encountered have been due to too much volume or too much water being added to the 
toilets. Solid waste is used on the lawn at the Lodge and liquid compost is mostly 
evaporated, unless there is excess in which case it is diverted to a leach field.  
 
Regulations have not been an issue; owner James Bowen said that the Sun-Mar system 
itself is regulated and the standards have been achieved for NSF Standard 41 so the land 
application regulations are not necessary.  
 
 
 
COMPOSTING TOILET SYSTEMS, INC. 
 
SHUSTER HALL 
RAYSTOWN FIELD CENTER 
Huntingdon, PA 
 
3 CTS waterless toilets 
 
Shuster Hall is a classroom, dining room and multipurpose room at the Raystown Field 
Station, which is part of Juniata College. The building is LEED certified and is used for 
residential immersion students in the Fall and Spring.  
 
The composting toilet system was installed in 2004 and the solid compost has yet to 
require removal. The liquid compost is diverted to an on-site wastewater treatment 
facility, which was required by the building codes. The site intended to use composting 
toilet systems in the dormitory buildings on site, but composting toilets did not suffice as 
“proper waste treatment” as defined by local codes. In order to use the composting toilets, 
the wastewater treatment facility would have to be larger and the digesters to be 
constantly fed to keep activated, an expense the facility was unwilling to adopt. Other 
composting toilet systems in the area have been known to spread their finished compost 
on land in the forests that surround the area, and is the intended use for the finished solid 
compost from Shuster Hall. 
 
The only problems Dr. Chuck Yohn, the Field Center Director, expressed was odor, 
which was easily resolved. Apparently, at first the system came with a sump pump 
accompanied by a side float, which would sometimes not activate. This was fixed by 
replacing the side float with a vertical float. Occasionally, when the power goes out and 
the venting fans stop, odor that is normally sucked away from the bathroom is trapped in 
the bathroom, causing an unpleasant odor. Dr. Yohn also mentioned that occasionally 
when there is higher than normal usage, extra maintenance is required. 
 
Overall, Dr. Yohn said that the Center is very happy with the system and is maintained by 
students. 
 
 

=== PAGE 12 ===
 
G. PECORA 
 
12 
 
 
ORGAN PIPE CACTUS NATIONAL MONUMENT 
ARIZONA NATIONAL PARK 
Ajo, Az 
 
2 CTS waterless toilets 
 
The Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument is an International Biosphere Reserve where 
many endangered plants and animals take refuge. The extreme desert temperatures have 
shown to be problematic to the composting toilet systems. 
 
The location and seasonality of this composting toilet system has created a non-ideal 
composting environment, as believed by the Chief of Maintenance of the National 
Monument. The toilet has been installed for approximately 20 years. The extreme heat of 
the desert causes the composting material to severely dry out in the summer when the 
system sees the most visitors. In the winter months, the system seems to function better, 
however visitation rates are extremely low and the inconsistency of visitors cause the 
composting system to struggle. Due to these factors, the material is not considered 
composted and is pumped out of the vaults twice a year.   
 
The liquid and solid compost is held in the vault composters until pumped out by a 
sanitation company. Because neither liquid nor solid waste is applied to land, regulatory 
agencies are not involved in this system. Overall, according to the Chief of Maintenance, 
the system has never worked as they thought it would and are overall unhappy with the 
system. The most problematic issue being the weather patterns and visitation fluxes. 
 
 
 
COTTONWOOD CAMPGROUND 
GRAND CANYON NATIONAL PARK 
Coconino, AZ 
 
4 CTS waterless toilets 
 
The Cottonwood Campground is located within the Grand Canyon State Park. Waterless 
composting toilets are located in very remote areas throughout the park. The systems are 
currently outdated and severely needing replacement. Proposals have been submitted to 
replace the systems with Advanced Composting Systems’ Pheonix model.  
 
Maintenance of these units require someone to hike, sometimes 20 miles per day, for 
servicing. Mules and helicopters are used to remove compost and garbage while 
delivering toilet paper and enzymes. The Trails Program Supervisor, Rich Goepfrich, said 
that they struggle quite a bit with users throwing trash into the units, which cause pockets 
of sewage. Overall, the compost is said to be pretty good, and is mixed with soil prior to 
land application. Goepfrich claims that they are very effective units and have operated 
without problems during the extreme temperature flux and use in the Grand Canyon, 

=== PAGE 13 ===
 
G. PECORA 
 
13 
 
which is inconsistent with the information obtained from the previous study of the system 
at the Arizona National Park, Organ Pipe Cactus Monument. 
 
 
 
ADVANCED COMPOSTING SYSTEMS 
 
WOLF EDUCATION AND RESEARCH CENTER 
Winchester, ID 
 
Two waterless composting toilets with manually rotating drum and liquid catch basin 
with liquid compost recycling system. 
 
The Wolf Education and Research Center is dedicated to public education and 
preservation of the population and habitats of grey wolves in Idaho. The composting 
toilet systems were built in 1996 by Advanced Composting Systems, Inc. The installed 
models were one of the first prototypes built by ACS, and are not technically the Phoenix 
System but very closely resembles it. Every couple days, operators must manually turn 
the drums to aerate the pile. A catch basin is located below the drum, which collects 
liquid that is then pumped back up and sprayed on top of the solid waste to maintain 
moisture levels in the composting drum. 
 
The bathrooms are run off solar power and rainwater is collected for cleaning. In the last 
15 years, the drums have needed to be emptied twice, where they gave the solid compost 
to a local hay farmer. The regulations in Idaho allow for land application of compost for 
non-human consuming crops. A small leach field was built for overflow of liquid waste 
should the catch basins reach their capacity. 
 
Overall, the Research Center is very happy with the systems and have had very few 
problems. Every 3-4 years they have come across a glitch but the customer service at 
ACS has been phenomenal. They highly recommend ACS and their systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 14 ===
 
G. PECORA 
 
14 
 
PUBLICATIONS 
 
Hill, Geoffrey B. & Baldwin, Susan A. (2012). Vermicomposting toilets, an alternative to 
latrine style microbial composting toilets, prove far superior in mass reduction, 
pathogen destruction, compost quality, and operational cost. Waste Management, 
32, 1811-1820. 
 
[*Geoff Hill is the Research Student at University of British Columbia who discovered 
the high levels of fecal coliform in finished compost from the C.K. Choi buildings 
composting units.]  
 
Summary: 
 
Geoff Hill and Susan Baldwin contacted agencies operating public composting toilets in 
Western Canada, Pacific Northwest USA and Western Europe. They collected end-
product samples for analysis from both Mixed Latrine Microbial Composting toilets 
(MLMC) and Source Separating Vermicomposting Toilets (SSVC). The results were 
compared and found that SSVC systems are superior over MLMC systems. 
 
Hill and Baldwin found that Operating and Maintenance costs were significantly lower 
for SSVC systems compared to MLMC systems. Pathogen reduction was not achieved in 
MLMC systems and were unable to find any literature on the systems that stated 
otherwise. Vermicomposting techniques in the SSVC systems proved to digest pathogens 
and achieve considerable material degradation. Land application of finished material is 
currently not approved for either system. According to Hill and Baldwin, finished 
material from MLMC systems should continue onto a biosolids treatment facility to 
further stabilize. SSVC units use a newly acknowledged treatment for waste treatment 
and process conditions have not yet been developed to approve land application.  
 
In conclusion, Hill and Baldwin strongly recommend SSVC units over MLMC units for a 
variety of reasons listed below.  
o Consistently low E. coli counts in end-product 
o Minimal operational hazards involved 
o Minimized fecal contaminated leachate 
o No bulking agent necessary 
o End-product decomposition by 41% 
o Low free-ammonia levels 
o Abundant nitrate levels 
 
Through email correspondence with Geoff Hill, he shared that he has designed several 
urine diverting composting toilet systems. He believes that liquid waste is a more 
valuable fertilizer with simpler and safer handling requirements than solid waste, almost 
to an extent to focus only on liquid waste.  
 
 
 

=== PAGE 15 ===
 
G. PECORA 
 
15 
 
 
 
References: 
 
Hill, Geoffrey B. & Baldwin, Susan A. (2012). Vermicomposting toilets, an alternative to 
latrine style microbial composting toilets, prove far superior in mass reduction, 
pathogen destruction, compost quality, and operational cost. Waste Management, 
32, 1811-1820. 
 
University of British Columbia. Advanced Studies in Canadian Design: C.K. Choi 
Building. University of Waterloo: Ian Peterse. 
 
Manufacturer Websites 
www.clivusmultrum.com 
www.sancor.ca 
www.sun-mar.com 
www.compostingtoilet.com 
www.comtoilet.com  
 
Facility Websites 
www.calvin.edu/academic/bunker/ 
www.bronxzoo.com 
www.recmanagement.com/200707fp03.php 
www.southface.org 
www.mec.ca/Main/content_text.jsp?FOLDER%3C%3Efolder_id=2534374302887103  
www.bar-t.com/mountainside.html 
www.gastateparks.org/item/32917  
www.gastateparks.org/item/32927 
www.wolfcenter.org 
www.nps.gov/grca/planyourvisit/campsite-information.htm 
www.nps.gov/orpi/index.htm 
www.juniata.edu/services/station/LakesideCenter/Lakesidecenter_Shustertour2.html 
www.redpinelodge.com 
www.harrisonriverretreat.com 
 
 
 
 
