=== PAGE 1 ===
18
Choices: Installing a Composting 
or a Vault Toilet
Bill Hamele
Environmental Engineer
Washington Office
Composting toilets usually are installed to eliminate the need for pumper
truck visits and to provide a healthy, safe, environmentally sound recreational
experience for National Forest System (NFS) patrons. Field experience with
composting toilets has increased knowledge about the proper conditions for
their use. This article summarizes the potential limitations that have been
experienced in installing, operating, and maintaining composting toilets and
also summarizes previously published material concerning the advantages and
disadvantages of composting and vault toilets.
Frequent information requests to the San Dimas Technology and Development
Center (SDTDC) have highlighted previously unrecognized limitations associated
with the use of composting toilets. Issues of employee health and safety, proper
maintenance, and climatic conditions required for proper operation of the
digester have consistently generated questions. 
Employee health and safety are of concern because staff must enter the toilet
building’s basement to access the digester for raking. Staff must open the
digester weekly and rake raw feces to facilitate proper operation, requiring
close contact with waste and potentially pathogenic organisms. Basements
may house rodents and snakes, and access stairways are often steep, poorly
lit, and sited in confined spaces. 
As performing weekly digester maintenance demands a large amount of staff
time, limited staff resources may be a major drawback. Additionally, its
unpleasant nature may discourage staff from performing maintenance and
raking as frequently as is required. As a result, composting toilet facilities
require a substantial resource commitment. 
Finally, composting toilets are not operationally robust; they operate well only
under climatic conditions conducive to biodegradation of human wastes. To
function properly, composting toilets must be located in moderate climates.
Considerations for siting composting toilets merit particular attention because
the optimal climatic range is fairly narrow. For more detailed information, see
the publication Composting Toilet Systems, Planning, Design, and Maintenance,
1995, 9523 1803-SDTDC, San Dimas Technology and Development Center,
USDA Forest Service, San Dimas, CA. 
The following table summarizes information from Guidelines for the Selection 
of a Toilet Facility, April 1991, 9123 1204-SDTDC, San Dimas Technology and
Development Center, USDA Forest Service, San Dimas, CA, and knowledge
gained from installing, operating, and maintaining composting toilets.

=== PAGE 2 ===
Vault and Composting 
Toilet Comparison
Vault Toilets 
Composting Toilets  
Employee Health and Safety 
Employee Health and Safety 
• Contact with feces is limited 
•  Close contact with raw feces 
or nonexistent
is required
• Confined space is not an issue 
•  Confined space and safety 
are issues because of 
basement location 
Maintenance Requirements 
Maintenance Requirements 
Periodic pumping based on 
Weekly raking and material 
intensity of use 
addition
Climatic Conditions 
Climatic Conditions  
Impervious, except to extreme cold 
Biodegradation processes are 
very sensitive; easily upset 
by climatic variation  
Patron Satisfaction 
Patron Satisfaction  
Can be impaired by odor 
Very good, if functioning properly  
Installation Costs 
Installation Costs  
Generally less than composters 
Generally more than vault 
because of basement construction 
and cost of digester  
Residuals Disposal 
Residuals Disposal 
Generally not difficult but can 
Generally not problematic, 
be problematic because of 
subject to local regulations
local regulations 
Capacity 
Capacity
Restricted by frequency of pumper 
Restricted because of limitation on 
truck visits 
biological process of degradation
Use Limitations 
Use Limitations  
Limited to locations accessible by 
Can serve all locations if 
pumper truck or boat 
construction is accessible and 
weekly maintenance is provided  
19
