Smart On-Street Parking: Survey of Actual Implementations in Cities and
Insights from Practitioners
Enock NDUNDAa,∗, Alexandre NICOLAS a,∗
aUniversite Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS France, Institut Lumi` ere Mati` ere, Lyon, 69100, Villeurbanne, France
Abstract
Smart solutions for on-street parking, which collect and leverage real-time information about on-street
parking space availability to guide drivers or adjust policies, have attracted considerable attention in
academia and in the corporate world, but comprehensive feedback on actual implementations was still
missing. Here, we survey around 25 smart parking (SP) implementations in cities across the world
using online sources. To get more candid insights, we complement this objective review with case stud-
ies centred around interviews that we conducted with practitioners from ten cities across continents
(San Francisco, Saint Pete Beach, Penang, Douala, Soissons, Grand Paris Seine Ouest, Montpellier,
Frauenfeld, Zurich, Perth). Summing up our observations, we underline the broad diversity of SP
implementations in terms of contexts and scales, from 2-to-3-year small-scale pilot studies to large de-
ployments that take centre stage in a city’s mobility policy. Technological choices also vary widely, from
the ground sensors used in pioneering deployments in the early 2010s and still in use, to static cameras
(which cover more spaces per device), and to mobile cameras with automatic licence-plate recognition
embarked in roaming cars, a more and more popular solution for parking control. Different attitudes to
the role given to smartphone applications are also noticed. But, importantly, not only means, but also
goals differ: facilitating parking control and enhancing revenue, or providing data for a curb-pricing
strategy, or feeding live data into navigation algorithms to reduce parking search times. Unfortunately,
their level of achievement is seldom gauged with robust metrics. Hardware durability issues are men-
tioned as causes of premature termination, particularly for ‘first-generation’ ground sensors, but so, too,
are fluctuating political will and changing priorities. Smaller-scale, geographically isolated implementa-
tions and pilots are particularly vulnerable to these fluctuations, to discontinued funding or defaulting
start-ups, and to limited public awareness.
Keywords: On-street parking; smart parking systems; smart city; implementations; IoT
1. Introduction
As urbanization continues to rise globally, more efficient parking management becomes critical in more
and more cities. Growing urban population, often rising car ownership levels, and strong car dependence
conspire with (necessarily) limited parking supply to intensify congestion in city centres, prolong parking
search times, and contribute to aggravating pollutant emissions [1]. Many car trips end on a parking
search phase (which lasts a couple of minutes on average in e.g. Frankfurt, Germany, but with large
fluctuations [2]), and the associated cruising traffic represents a significant share of the total traffic
(evaluated to e.g. 15% in Stuttgart, Germany [3]). To alleviate these externalities, previous studies
have highlighted the need for sustainable and adaptive solutions, when the public transportation network
is not competitive [4] and active mobility is not sufficiently widespread. These solutions include parking
guidance systems directing drivers to non-saturated parking facilities [5], demand-based pricing that
∗Corresponding authors
Email addresses: enock.ndunda@univ-lyon1.fr (Enock NDUNDA), alexandre.nicolas@cnrs.fr (Alexandre
NICOLAS)
Preprint submitted to Elsevier February 9, 2026
arXiv:2602.06517v1  [physics.soc-ph]  6 Feb 2026
adjusts curb parking rates to reduce the occupancy on the busiest block faces, possibly in a dynamic
way [6], digitally accessible real-time information communicated to drivers [7], as well as the possibility
to reserve one’s spot in advance in some parking lots (e.g., in the Bay Area, near San Francisco, United
States), notably for park-and-ride users [8].
Many of these ‘smart’ solutions have become commonplace. Systems that have been around for decades
include parking guidance to, and in, off-street facilities with the help of variable message signs (VMS)
[5] and/or red or green lights above parking spaces depending on their availability. Online marketplaces
where one can book a (typically private and off-street) parking space for a limited duration ( gaparking
[7]) have also flourished, with a considerable number of start-ups and companies that purport to connect
space owners and drivers. Finally, as smartphones have become ubiquitous, so have smart (mobile-
based) payment methods.
Comparatively, smart on-street parking solutions (SPS) relying on real-time space monitoring have not
expanded as far and wide globally. Admittedly, many start-ups have blossomed to help drivers find a
spot on the fly in busy downtown areas notably via a smartphone application and/or help municipalities
monitor on-street parking occupancy and control parking payment. In parallel, the academic literature
has also seen proposals galore for sensor technologies that can operate outdoors [9], for wireless methods
to pass parking-related information, and for algorithms that predict parking occupancy based on non-
exhaustive data [10, 11], efficiently allocate parking spaces, and guide drivers towards them [12], as well
as for economical city-scale system deployment strategies [13]. Such is the number of publications on
the topic that several review papers have tried to summarise them, either with an all-encompassing
scope fashion [7] or a more specific focus on one or several facets: all types of actual smart parking
implementations before 2005 [8], systems design and AI [14], sensors and related technology [15, 16]
(where one can read that already in 2009 ”vehicle detections sensors [are] aplenty on the market”), and
a close-up on the challenges associated with outdoor use [9].
In this light, is it worth piling yet another manuscript atop the existing literature? We contend that
the translation of the foregoing ideas and services into smart-parking (SP) deployments in the real
world actually deserves careful examination. Indeed, in the complex social, technical, and political
environment of cities, this translational stage involves multiple hurdles, from the accuracy of sensors in
real urban settings to their long-term maintenance and to the economic viability of their vendors (often
small companies) and to the question of the persistence of the political support for the initiative. There
may also be a gap between expected efficiencies and on-the-ground reality. As we will see, even SP
projects widely highlighted as ‘success stories’ come along with some caveats and nuances. In addition,
the generic goals pursued by SP, namely
1. to shorten drivers’ parking search times,
2. to improve user experience through accurate, reliable, and adaptive information services,
3. to reduce congestion in city centres by limiting cruising traffic, and
4. to enhance parking revenues in a cost-effective way,
are weighted quite differently depending on the context; it thus makes little sense to gauge success with
just one metric.
Accordingly, this paper targets actual implementations of on-street SPS in cities around the world. Not
only does it review the technologies in use, project sizes, and effectiveness in the different cities, but it
also aims to provide critical insights into the diverse ambitious and practical challenges, and the balance
between technological promises and actual limitations. For this purpose, we have reviewed around 25
actual SPS implementations that give (quasi-)real-time information on on-street parking availability.
We complement this objective and fairly comprehensive review with semi-structured interviews con-
ducted with practitioners from ten cities across continents to get more candid feedback and personal
perspectives on the different facets of SPS.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Chapter 2 introduces and delineates the types of SPS
under consideration, in terms of technology and deployment, and exposes our methodological approach,
including data sources, analytical tools, and limitations. Chapter 3 reports the results of our systematic
survey, which highlights the evolution and growth of SP initiatives globally and reviews actual imple-
mentations of on-street SPS around the globe. Chapter 4 focuses on specific implementations selected
as case studies, with more candid, all-around insights notably gained from interviews with stakeholders
and practitioners. Finally, Chapter 5 summarises our findings and discusses the effectiveness of SPSs
across key performance indicators such as congestion and search times, parking pricing and revenue,
and user satisfaction, and it underlines common vulnerabilities in SP deployments.
2. Definitions & Methods
To clarify the scope of our study, we start by classifying SPS based on their functionality, effectiveness
and target users. Then we describe our methodological choices regarding the literature review of
academic and industrial publications, the systematic analysis of real-world SP implementations, and
the set of semi-structured expert interviews with stakeholders. Figure 1 gives an overview of these steps.
Figure 1: Steps followed in this paper.
2.1. Delineation and Classification of Smart Parking Solutions
SP encompasses a wide range of solutions to facilitate parking, from the basic payment process to
complex, sensor driven, AI-augmented ecosystems. We delineate three broad categories: Payment
Systems, Detection & Monitoring Systems, and Integrated Smart Platforms.
2.1.1. Payment Systems
A. Traditional Parking Meters are stand-alone, coin-operated or card-enabled meters. This long-
standing form of parking control [17] is still widespread in many urban environments thanks to
its low cost and simplicity.
B. Smart Parking Meters (see Figure 2) extend conventional meters with wireless connectivity,
digital payment capabilities (i.e., credit cards, e-wallets and SMS), and limited data reporting
(transceiver functionality). They often interface with mobile applications or central servers, en-
abling zone-based enforcement and basic occupancy estimation through transaction logs [18, 19].
Though not directly measuring space usage, their digital footprint provides valuable temporal
usage patterns.
C. Mobile Parking Payment Applications are software-only solutions enabling users to pay for
parking on their smartphone. They can enhance user convenience and reduce meter infrastructure,
but they do not provide direct occupancy data, unless coupled with auxiliary sensing architecture
[20].
Since our focus is on real-time information, these payment systems will not qualify as SPS in the
following.
2.1.2. Occupancy Detection Systems
A. Overhead and Ground Sensors are fixed sensors which are buried in the ground underneath
parking spaces, fixed on the ground, or mounted overhead, above the parking space (depending
on their type). They rely on various physical waves to detect the presence of a car: ultrasound
(ultrasonic sensors), radio waves (radar), infrared, visible light (optical sensors), local magnetic
field variations (magnetometers), etc. These diverse technologies have been largely documented
in past publications [8, 15, 7, 9, 16]. Magnetometers (i.e., inductive coils that detect the variations
of the local magnetic flux when cars - more precisely, their metal parts - are above them) and
ultrasonic sensors (which sound out ultrasounds and capture the reflected signals) compete for
the title of most popular solution: magnetometers are reported to be the most common devices
for municipal deployment (as of 2017) in [7], whereas ultrasonic sensors seem to dominate the
academic publications reviewed in [16] and may be even more cost-effective [7]. (Costs should
not be estimated only based on the cost of the device, though, as installation, maintenance, and
durability also matter for cost effectiveness and in several municipal SP projects equipment-related
costs were bundled in a broader package or subsumed into monthly subscription fees; the financial
question will be one facet of the case studies of Chap. 4). On the whole, ground sensors offer
high per-space resolution but require extensive installation and maintenance; reported detection
accuracies range from 85–98% [21], varying with environmental conditions and time (see Chap. 4).
It is noteworthy that outdoor conditions are much more challenging than indoor parking [9],
because of sunlight, rainfall, the absence of a ceiling, among other adverse factors.
B. Static or mobile cameras , coupled with AI-powered object recognition software, are increas-
ingly used to monitor occupancy. These vision-based systems rely on either static surveillance
cameras or mobile platforms such as automatic number-plate recognition (ANPR) vehicles. Static
cameras use computer vision to detect vehicle presence in delineated parking spaces and estimate
near real-time occupancy, often integrated with AI for license plate verification. Mobile ANPR
systems enable high-coverage enforcement through periodic sweeps; this technology was initially
deployed to address illegal parking, but it has diversified. Their accuracy hinges on the capturing
angle, the camera quality, lighting, how well the algorithm was calibrated, and possibly also license
plate neatness; it often exceeds 90% in ideal conditions. Finally, these systems may raise some
privacy concerns due to the video-recording (and the frequent transmission of images to confirm
that a car is illegally parked).
Figure 2 shows some examples of ground sensors, mobile cameras, smart parking meters, and static
cameras.
2.1.3. Integrated Smart Platforms (ISP)
A. Real-time information on on-street parking availability , based on the occupancy detec-
tion systems, can be communicated to the general driver typically via a smartphone application
or accessible only to the City or transportation authority for monitoring (via a dashboard) and
payment control purposes. Apart from cases for which full accuracy is critical (e.g., to control
payment and issue fines), non-exhaustive real-time data can be completed by occupancy predic-
tions through machine-learning, which leverage historical data and behavioural analytics. The
improvement of these predictions has been the target of several academic works [22, 23, 24]. For
instance, Zhao et al. found that support-vector machines perform well for occupancy prediction
for car parks of variable sizes [23], while Yang and colleagues reached a mean absolute percent-
age error (MAPE) of 10.6% for block-level occupancy forecasting 30 minutes in advance [22] and
Vlahogianni’s team arrived at a MAPE below 9% for 1-hour-in-advance predictions of off-street
parking occupancy with an LSTM featuring attention models, by also including traffic data as in-
put. Beyond academia, companies have also made substantial investments to develop AI-powered
occupancy prediction capabilities. For example, ParkNav claims to provide their application users
with predictions that are at least “80 to 90%” accurate.
B. Smart navigation assistance towards available parking spaces can also be provided to drivers,
based on real-time occupancy information. The principle is similar to a traditional GPS navigation
system, except that instead of guiding the driver to their final destination the system guides them
to a nearby location where they are likely to find vacant parking spots. This service is often
included in smartphone applications that display real-time parking availability. In some sense,
this service can be regarded as an upgraded and individualised version of the variable message
signs that inform drivers on availability in nearby parking facilities and that have been in place
for more than thirty years (e.g., in London, Nottingham and Frankfurt-am-Main [5]).
C. Digital parking reservation consists in the possibility to book a parking space online in ad-
vance. This option is widespread for privately owned parking spaces that are rented in online
‘marketplaces’ developed by companies ( gaparking) and it was implemented early in some off-
street parking facilities where finding a space is critical (e.g., at park-and-ride facilities, such as
the Bay Area Rapid Transit in California, where spots could be reserved for a single day or on
a longer term, as recalled by Shaheen et al. [8]). On the other hand, for municipally managed
on-street parking, none of our detailed case studies (see Chap. 4) includes this reservation option.
D. Comprehensive SP Applications (Payment, Navigation, Reservation) integrate a com-
bination of SP services. For instance, these mobile platforms can be used as payment systems
as well as for real-time navigation. In that case, they leverage real-time occupancy data, often
fused from multiple sources (sensors, historical data, traffic feeds). Users are guided to available
spots, thus spending less time searching for parking and allegedly alleviating congestion as a re-
sult. These solutions embody the convergence of IoT, cloud computing, and user-centric design as
shown in Table 1. Our case studies (Chap. 4) have revealed that, because of the rapidly evolving
ecosystem of start-ups in the parking business, the vendors (service providers) may change in the
course of a project and diverse mobile applications may be put forward (either successively or,
in some cases, simultaneously), which makes it more difficult to get drivers to be aware and use
this mobile service. Having different parking-related services (and beyond) combined in a single
application can help mitigate this problem.
Table 1, inspired from [7], gives an overview of the hardware and software associated with the above
smart parking solutions, along with their degree of innovcation and cost (i.e installation, maintenance,
& operational costs).
Figure 2: A variety of SPS: Pictures of smart parking cameras & sensors.
2.2. Methods used to gauge academic trends
To assess the academic trends relative to SP, this paper relies on four data sources: Google Scholar,
IEEE Xplore, ScienceDirect and Springer Link . We used the following keywords and phrases in the
search engines to find relevant papers: ”smart parking services”, ”parking meters”, ”smart parking
systems”, ”autonomous parking”, ”smart parking solution”, ”smart car parking”, ”intelligent parking”,
”IoT parking”, ”automated parking”, ”connected parking”, ”parking management system”, ”parking
wireless sensor”, ”parking” system for vehicles”, ”smart parking reservation”, ”parking using image
processing”. The results were collected and screened for candidate publications.
2.3. Methods used to review SP implementations
To capture a global perspective on implemented SPS, we conducted a systematic review of cities that
have implemented such technologies. We did our best to reflect geographic diversity (even though
language has probably generated a selection bias) and to include multiple types of SP technologies.
Our first set of analysed implementations included 51 cities from 21 countries and 6 continents. Further
screening reduced the total to 25 cities, after excluding implementations that only offer smart payment
Solution Hardware Software How
innova-
tive?
How
costly?
Traditional parking meters Mechanical coin/card me-
ter
- + Variable
Smart parking meters Connected digital meter Payment gateway ++ Variable
Smart Payment Apps Smartphone, cloud-based
server
App, cloud backend,
API
+ +
Ground sensors In-ground magnetome-
ters, ultrasonic sensors
Sensor network, edge
processing, API
+++ +++
Overhead sensors Infrared, radar, LiDAR
sensors
Image processing, sig-
nal filters
+++ +++
Static and mobile cameras Fixed/vehicle-mounted
cameras + ANPR
CV + OCR + real-
time analytics
+++ +++
Smart Parking Apps Smartphones, server, 3rd-
party integration
App, machine-
learning prediction,
navigation
+++ ++
Table 1: Delineation of Smart Parking Solutions Based on Technology, Efficiency, and Cost. Costs give an idea of the full
deployment cost of the solution.
methods or smart parking meters. Importantly, not all these solutions are still active: a number of them
have been terminated; their study is interesting, to avoid a focus on only viable or successful projects.
Figure 3 shows the geographic distribution of surveyed cities on the world map, distinguishing between
implementations passed in review and detailed case studies.
2.4. Interviews of stakeholders: methodology
For more direct feedback, following in the steps of [25], we complemented the foregoing global review
with a series of semi-structured interviews with stakeholders. The objective was to validate and enrich
the findings of the systematic review by capturing real-world experiences, contextual nuances, and
expert insights.
For that purpose, we contacted stakeholders from various cities around the world where smart on-
street parking efforts had been carried out. Our focus was on executives in transport departments or in
municipal technical services, but we also approached some SP companies’ Chief Executive Officers. Our
contact endeavours (mostly by email) yielded a response rate of about 40%. The selected interviewees
represent a diverse geographic (see Fig. 3) and technological spectrum.
Interviews were conducted in the form of 50-minute to 1-hour long video calls with two interviewers
(the authors) and generally one interviewee. Before each interview, we got acquainted with the city of
interest and prepared a short list of open questions, most of which were similar across cities:
• “What motivated the introduction of the smart-parking solution?” / “Can you introduce us to
the context of the SP implementation?”
• “How reliable was the technological solution?”
• “Were traffic and parking search conditions quantitatively evaluated before SP implementation?”
• “Were there objections to the implementation?”
• “How was the implementation appraised by citizens?”
Other questions were specific. But we mostly insisted that the interviewee should have time to dwell
on the facets that they considered most relevant. We also made clear that they could speak openly
and, should they have accidentally divulged a piece of information that they would prefer to retain,
they could write to us later and ask us to not mention it. After finalising the first version of our
manuscript, we sent it to the Interviewees and left them two weeks to go through it and, if need be, ask
for amendments; a couple of them responded, requesting a few corrections of factual errors on numbers
or assertions.
Figure 3: Geographic distribution of the cities whose SP implementations were globally reviewed and/or used as case
studies.
3. Global review of smart-parking implementations: Results
This chapter exposes the results of our SP-related investigations, first by considering SP trends over
time, then analysing the characteristics of SP implementations over the world.
3.1. Growing academic and industrial interests for SPS
We start by assessing the evolution of the academic interest in SP, following the search method described
in Sec. 2.2. Figure 4 evinces that this interest has been steadily rising since year 2000, as reflected by
both the number of publications per year on the subject and the number of citations recorded in the
different databases under consideration. Until 2005∼2010, the literature on the topic remained modest,
but strongly expanded after 2010. This rise aligns with the global push towards smart city initiatives,
especially in urban mobility and intelligent transportation systems, echoed by heavy investment in smart
infrastructure, as well as IoT-enabled parking solutions, such as SFPark funding by the Federal Highway
Administration in 2010, Texas 2015 Regional Truck Parking Information and Management System
across eight states ( $25 million), the $6.9 million grant by the U.S. Department of Transportation for
the I-10 Corridor Coalition Truck Parking Availability System (for trucks) started in 2020 in the USA,
and QPARK, a Horizon 2020-funded E.U. project led by Ubiwhere to develop low-cost smart parking
sensors and analytics, in the E.U. Concurrently, along with the swift pervasion of smartphones since
the early 2010s, technological advancements such as low-power sensors [26], GPS, cloud computing [27],
and the rise of mobile apps made SPS feasible and scalable.
In Fig. 4, an inflection in academic publications starting around 2020 might be noticeable. This tentative
slowing down might reflect a shift in research priorities to broader or newer urban mobility challenges
such as electric vehicle (EV) integration, multimodal transport, or more sustainable alternatives. These
trends reveal how closely SP research has tracked urban policy, technology readiness, and funding cycles.
(a) Annual SP Publications
 (b) Cumulative Annual Citations
Figure 4: Evolution of the academic literature about SPS between 1999 and 2025 (July, 2nd)
Figure 5: Evolution of Service Providers and Milestones. The thick coloured lines start at the foundation of the company
or the first implementation and terminate at its end. There may occasionally be an uncertainty of one or two years about
these dates.
The extended timeline displayed in Fig. 5 includes both city-scale on-street SP implementations, in
Figure 6: Details of the activities of some companies involved in SP, with website references.
its upper part, and major companies involved in SP (also refer to Fig. 6 for further information and
references about start-ups and companies involved in the SP market). While some of these entities
burgeoned within big firms, many of them (a large majority of those shown in the figure) emerged as
start-ups. Since SP implementation is a multi-faceted activity, it is worth classifying these companies by
their main activity; in Fig. 5, we considered the following categories: general parking monitoring or curb
management, digital parking reservation and gaparking (often with a strong off-street activity), sensor
development and production, other specialisation. Admittedly, a substantial fraction of the companies
span boundaries between activity sectors, but many have a core speciality, which explains why cities
often commission several of these firms to design and deploy their SP strategy, as we will see in Chap. 4.
Even though one should acknowledge a probable bias towards firms and SP implementations that
have survived until the present date, the timeline clearly highlights the existence of different phases
of development. Many sensor (hardware)-making companies were founded in the 2000s, notably in
Europe, a period to which we refer as the times of the ‘technological foundations’, while the SP service
providers that still dominate the market typically emerged between 2005 and 2015. Meanwhile, city-
wide on-street SP implementations started to blossom in the 2010s (with the much-publicised SFPark
project in the early 2010s, in particular). After this early phase of large-scale adoptions, a rising number
of cities (in Europe, in the USA, in Australia, among other places) came to test on-street SP, often
first in the vicinity of University campuses or in well-off districts, without necessarily adopting it then
on a larger scale or on a permanent basis. In a business sector where there is a premium to well
established actors (because they can build on experience and notoriety, and streamline costs and risks),
a consolidation stage was to be expected and, indeed, the SP market started to consolidate around 2020,
with several mergers between significant market players (see the merging branches in Fig. 5). In parallel,
and possibly in a related way, along with the evolution of the political focuses (e.g., with a stronger will
to move away from the car-centric city paradigm in Europe [28]), technological transformations were
taking place, spurred on by the boom of AI and computer vision.
3.2. Regional distribution of SP implementations
Let us now consider how SP implementations are distributed around the world. A caveat is however in
order, before any comment: the “baseline” on-street parking situation differs widely between cities and
continents. While on-street parking is dominant in cities such as Los Angeles (75% of all parking spaces)
and San Francisco (63%) on the West Coast of the USA, it is less abundant than off-street parking in
Europe (37% on average), and generally scarce in Eastern Asian cities such as Beijing (5%) or Tokyo,
as highlighted by Lin et al. [7]. This is naturally reflected in the contrasted figures for parking coverage
across cities, which represents up to 81% of land use in Los Angeles as of 2015 and as little as 7% in
Tokyo. One should bear in mind this diversity when commenting on municipal SPS deployments.
The geographic distribution of cities included in our extensive SPS review or in our specific case studies
is shown in Fig. 3. Europe and North America dominate our collation of SP implementations. Although
we aimed for as uniform a coverage as possible, this dominance possibly stems from some bias in the
search focus, language, and the diverse mediatisation of such initiatives; it probably also reflects the
larger number of adoptions or tests of SP strategies that actually have taken place.
In the Southern hemisphere, Australia has been an active SP territory. In contrast, the African con-
tinent (where several cities that develop quite fast and in a partly uncontrolled way are increasingly
confronted with parking difficulties) only contributes one or two cases, with a solution launched in
2024; nevertheless, in Sec. 4 a case study on an emerging solution in a couple of African capitals will
be exposed.
3.3. Coverage of SP implementations
The examples shown in Fig. 3 include cities of very different sizes and SP deployments that cover wide-
ranging fractions of the total number of on-street spots. This diversity is reflected in Fig. 7, which plots
the number of spaces monitored by an SPS against the (estimated) total number of on-street spaces.
Not surprisingly, irrespective of the size of their on-street parking supply, the cities included in the
SP review are generally known historically for their congested traffic (Boston, Moscow, San Francisco,
Barcelona, etc.) and for a perceived shortage of parking supply compared to the parking demand.
Parking-related policies are often deemed pivotal in these cities to alleviate the traffic conditions. For
instance, the SFPark project targeted some of the busiest parking areas in San Francisco and, by
dynamically adjusting parking rates in each street segment, it aimed to homogenise the occupancy and
to reduce parking search by curbing the occupancy on the busiest street portions [29]. The case of
Moscow is also interesting in this respect, as on-street parking used to be free until 2012, but the city
then gradually turned to paid parking with rapidly increasing parking rates, in order to reduce car
traffic and promote car-sharing.
One could thus think that the SPS coverage ratio, i.e., the fraction of spaces covered by the SPS
(highlighted by the colour of the symbols in Fig. 3) depends on how congested traffic is known to be
in the city. This would be wrong. In fact, since one of the goals of municipal SP implementations is
to generate parking revenue by controlling payment, SP is rarely deployed for free spaces, where no
additional revenue can even up SP operation, and the percentage of free spaces varies widely across
cities (and along time, as we saw in the example of Moscow). Besides this effect, the fraction of covered
spaces in the reviewed cities appears to depend mostly on the implementation stage ( is this only a pilot
study, as in Cologne-Nippes or St Pete Beach, or a full-scale deployment, like in Penang? ) and the
technology that is used to monitor parking occupation. In this respect, apart from the case of Penang,
the most extensive coverages are achieved when mobile cameras (typically aboard ANPR vehicles) are
deployed. That being said, the comparison is unfair, insofar as this deployment does not provide truly
real-time information, in contrast to static cameras or ground sensors.
3.4. Technological implementation
The distribution of sensor and camera technologies used to monitor parking is presented in Fig. 8.
Despite the challenges associated with outdoor detection, diverse solutions have been implemented; we
group them into overhead sensors, ground sensors, mobile cameras, and static cameras, regardless of
the nature of the waves used by the ground sensors or whether the mobile cameras are embarked in
dedicated vehicles or in public buses (the case studies will provide more detail in this regard).
The number of sensors strongly depends on the strategy, from 10 ∼ 100 mobile cameras to 1 , 000∼
40, 000 ground sensors. These variations clearly mirror operational differences: ground sensors typically
monitor one parking space, but provide real-time information (which may be directly useful for drivers
in search of parking), whereas each mobile (embarked) cameras combined with an ANPR or object
detection software can cover an extensive number of spaces, but at a lower frequency (less than one
control per hour, typically), which may be sufficient to control payment and, if need be, issue citations,
103 104 105 106
On-street spaces
103
104
105
106
Monitored spaces Melbourne
Penang
Dubai*
Los Angeles*San FranciscoX
Beijing*X
Barcelona
Boston*X
Montpellier
NiceX
Grand Paris Seine OuestSoissons Cologne-NippesX
Moscow*
St Pete BeachX
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Coverage ratio
Figure 7: Number of on-street parking spaces covered by the SP system as a function of the total number of on-street
spaces, for various cities included in the review. The dashed green line, representing the line y = x, corresponds to full
coverage. Circle sizes are proportional to the logarithm of the number of covered spots. A red star before the city’s name
indicates a terminated project.
⋆ For the cities marked with a star, the total number of spaces is uncertain, despite email requests to the transport
departments. For Boston, we use the estimate (8,000) indicated to us by the City of Boston, even though it is highly
dubious. For Los Angeles (LA), we made the assumption that the numbers of spaces in LA City and LA County are
proportional to their respective populations. For Moscow, the monitored spaces do not include those observed by ANPR
cars.
thus generating revenue, but not directly relevant for parking search 1 . Static cameras cover an inter-
mediate number of parking spaces (from only a few up to several tens), but can be fully unmanned,
unlike present-day ANPR cars.
Delving into the details, one realises that the performed categorisation masks a great level of complexity.
First, different technologies may be used by the same city. For example, in Dubai as well as in Moscow,
ground sensors (in particular, the SENSIT sensors manufactured by NEDAP), static and embarked
cameras have all been implemented over the years. Secondly, in the same vein, as we will detail
in the case studies, within a given project, the choice of sensors may change over the course of the
project, notably favouring cameras over ground sensors at the end of the day in San Francisco, Prague,
and Soissons (France). Finally, each hardware category gathers distinct solutions made by various
manufacturers and with different properties, not to mention that in several cases SP is not implemented
by one main private partner, but shared between multiple partners for the hardware, the deployment
on the field, the digital applications, etc.
3.5. Information communicated to drivers
As SP may mainly target the control of payment (to increase parking revenue) or the continuous collec-
tion of data by the transport authority (to adapt parking policy accordingly, e.g., by adjusting parking
rates as in SFPark), an SP implementation does not always entail the communication of real-time infor-
mation about parking availability to the drivers. Even when some information is communicated, it may
lack detail or spatial granularity, especially if the goal is ‘educational’, that is, to point to saturation in
1Nonetheless, several start-ups leverage AI to make parking occupancy predictions (at diverse time scales) based on
these infrequent data.
Figure 8: On-street SPS infrastructure. The dates correspond to the beginning of the implementation, whereas the
numbers of sensors are updated to take into account project extensions. Note that many more cities are actually using
ANPR cars for parking control, but not necessarily promoting any SP functionality beyond control.
some areas or at some times and therefore discourage cruising for an on-street spot (see the case studies
of Saint Pete Beach and Grand Paris Seine Ouest in Chap. 4).
In the remaining cases, detailed real-time information should be accessible to drivers and guide them
to available spots, generally via a smartphone application. However, we have observed that these
applications are rarely stable over several years. Instead, they tend to be either plainly discontinued
(notably when the company that produced them goes bankrupt), or replaced by other applications (not
necessarily sponsored by the city), or integrated into a broader-ranging application (for instance, the
parking app of Mosman, Australia, was replaced by a ‘Park’nPay’ app for all New South Wales). Thus,
even when live feeds giving raw parking availability data in real time can be found, e.g., for Melbourne
or Los Angeles, there is not always one ‘go-to’ smartphone application that exploits these data and is
known to most drivers; this echoes the problem of low public awareness that Peng et al. pointed to in
the case of London [30]. The consolidation of the SP market that seems to be taking place may improve
the situation in the coming years.
Instructive though they were, the above paragraphs also show the limitations of an objective systematic
review as far as SP is concerned. It fails to transcribe the specific context in each city, the actual goals
primarily pursued by the stakeholders who decided to implement an SP strategy, and the particularities
of the technological solution that was implemented. Also missing is a candid, unpolished appraisal
of the effectiveness of the implementation. Therefore, we now move on to case studies for which we
interviewed stakeholders.
4. Case studies
This section gives a concise but all-rounding synthesis of the case studies that were conducted and the
feedback from the stakeholders involved in these SP implementations, listed in Tab. 2.
4.1. San Francisco, California, United States
4.1.1. City Context and Launch of SFPark
San Francisco lies in the Bay Area in the North of California. With a municipal population slightly
below 900,000 residents and a density above 7,000 inh/km 2, it is the second densest city in the United
States.
Name City Occupation in relation with SP
Kenya WHEELER San Francisco, USA Main Transportation Planner
Michelle GONZALEZ St Pete Beach, USA Director of Transportation and
Parking
Nurbayah Iswanis Binti
ISHAK
Penang Island,
Malaysia
Deputy Accountant
Caroline SACK KENDEM Douala, Cameroon CEO of EZ Park
Kevin BOULANGER Soissons, France IT Manager
Hugo LAMBERT Grand Paris Seine
Ouest, France
Deputy Director for Mobility
Peter KOCH
Andrea FOSSATI
Frauenfeld, Switzer-
land
Director of the Communication and
Economy Service
CEO of Parquery AG
Georg SPYCHER Z¨ urich, Switzerland General Manager at Parking Z¨ urich
AG
Justin McKIRDY Perth, Australia Executive Director Urban Mobility
with Department of Transport and
Major Infrastructure (DTMI)
Table 2: Identity and position of the stakeholders that were interviewed for the present paper.
The city features different types of parking spaces, some of which are colour-painted on the curb, e.g., in
green for short-term parking (less than 15 or 30 minutes). In residential permit areas, cars can generally
park for up to two hours in the same space with no permit. In any event, cars should not stay parked
for more than 3 days. Parking meters, when present, indicate paid on-street parking and one can pay
for durations up to 2 (or 4) hours, either cash or via a mobile application. Even though on-street
parking spaces contribute an estimated 63% to the total parking supply, there is a significant off-street
parking capacity, but at rates that are generally deemed quite expensive (more than US $ 7∼ 10/hour)
compared to the on-street alternative (typically, from US $ 1 to US $ 7 per hour).
The city is widely known for the difficulty to find parking spaces. That being said, this scarcity of
available spaces does not necessarily generate significant cruising traffic or long search times. Indeed,
prominent researchers have argued that it is well assimilated by drivers, who thus tend to park some
distance away (and ahead) of the busiest areas, so that cruising remains limited [31].
In 2010∼2011, San Francisco pioneered the large-scale deployment of an SP system with a pilot study
dubbed SFPark and funded by a Federal Highway Administration grant. Ground sensors were installed
in 8,200 parking spots, out of the 28,000 metered spaces in the city, with the intent to improve real-time
occupancy monitoring and inform demand-responsive pricing: between 2011 and 2014, parking rates
in the considered neighbourhoods were periodically adjusted to meet the occupancy target range, i.e.,
60% to 80% occupancy. The availability and prices were displayed on a dedicated website and mobile
application. The pilot was terminated in 2014.
4.1.2. Interview with Mr. Kenya WHEELER, Principal Transportation Planner, San Francisco
Due to its pioneering nature and to the design of the project, and unlike the other case studies in the
present paper, SFPark was thoroughly evaluated, notably in a report published in June 2014 [32]. The
report states that the pilot was successful in many respects, with a target block occupancy that was
met 31% more often after implementation, with reported search times that decreased by 43%, and with
an estimated 30% reduction of greenhouse gas emissions during parking search [32]. Notwithstanding
this detailed evaluation, we were eager to interview an operational stakeholder, Mr. Kenya WHEELER,
Principal Transportation Planner at San Francisco Transport Authority, with the hope that the oral
format of the discussion would supplement published results with candid opinions and the 10+ years that
have elapsed would bring additional hindsight. Indeed, some of the feedback reported below stresses
points that did not particularly catch the eye previously.
Sensors. Wireless magnetometer-based sensors designed by StreetSmart Technologies were buried in
the ground in each parking space in select neighbourhoods; they detected whenever vehicles enter and
exit a parking space [33]. For the SFPark pilot, sensor quality standards had been fixed, but Mr.
WHEELER insists that such sensors were a “very nascent technology” at that time and San Francisco
was the first city to deploy them on a large scale. Still, he deems that in the first phase sensors worked
well and the standards were generally met, with an accuracy of 86% to 90%. This was ascertained by
validation on the ground and computer vision (as is currently tested in Seattle). The Interviewee adds
that, shortly before our meeting, he had learnt that a comparison between in-ground sensors, above-
ground sensors and cameras had shown a good match, even though the different technologies “tend to
pick different events”. Nonetheless, during SFPark, certain areas and factors caused major difficulties.
In particular, close to train tracks, electromagnetic interferences due to the passage of trains, street-
cars, and even buses interfered with the magnetometers. This led the transport authority to eventually
“pivot to another vendor” and “plac[e] two sensors in nearly half of all parking spaces” [32]. Still, the
data were marred by misdetections and false positives, and they were not reliable enough to calculate
precise turnover rates and parking durations; the occupancy was aggregated in time for more reliability.
Above all, the sensor performance “degraded over time, [with a] big drop mid-2013”, a bit more than
one year after their installation. In December 2013, “the vast majority of sensors were off-line”. It
seems that one of the major issues was the durability of the hardware; the promised lifespan of 5 to
10 years clearly failed to be met. As they were self-contained boxes buried in the asphalt, it was not
possible to just replace the battery. Thus, they were active for about 3 years, but then there was no
funding to replace them.
Connectivity. A standard of 85% had been set for the percentage of events received within 60 seconds.
This connectivity requirement was also found to be a practically relevant challenge, especially in a “hilly
city” like San Francisco and relying on cell phone carriers and the 2G-3G network.
Financial aspects. Mr. WHEELER insists that such innovative projects have only been possible with
the financial support of (federal) grants – from the Federal Highway Administration in the case of
SFPark; once the pilot was over, the “costs [to maintain and replace the sensors] could not be covered
without new external funding” and their operation was thus discontinued. Figure 9 shows the cost
breakdown of the solution between 2011 and 2014.
In terms of revenue, the project generated measurable benefits by making it easier to pay, so that more
drivers paid the meter and compliance rates rose, possibly “increasing public space revenue by $6.5M”;
that being said, the observed reduction in citation revenue somewhat tempers this benefit.
The foregoing points highlight a structural challenge: while smart infrastructure pilots may prove
effective technically, scaling them requires long-term capital planning.
Impact on traffic. SFPark belongs to the few SP projects whose quantitative impact on traffic and on
the environment was rigorously assessed. Given the downturn in the economy during the project, which
curbed down traffic, it is hard to compare the before and after situations. In fact, the most compelling
analysis probably stems from the comparison of areas affected by the pilot and control areas. Search
times were estimated by surveying drivers and by collecting floating car data with staff driving along
pre-determined routes and measuring their parking search times. The reported search times decreased
from 11.6 minutes to 6.6 minutes on average, which marks a 43% reduction in pilot areas, as compared
to the 13% reduction in control areas [32]. This aligns well with the observation that block-faces were
full a much smaller fraction of the time in pilot areas, whereas (perhaps surprisingly) they tended to
be full more often in control areas.
Greenhouse gas emissions were estimated based on these data and the resulting savings in vehicle miles
traveled per day (in contrast with more recent smart grant projects, e.g., in Minneapolis, where gas
“sensors have been deployed at intersections”). It was found that emissions decreased by 30% in pilot
areas vs. 6% in control areas.
Perspectives and personal opinion. The Respondent underlines that, despite the technical issues en-
countered in this pioneering project, it generated a wealth of data that are being used up to this day.
For instance, the results were used to implement city-wide rate adjustments depending on the demand in
2017∼2018. The lessons remain highly instructive for cities weighing the trade-offs between high-cost,
maintenance-intensive hardware solutions and lower-cost, policy-driven approaches such as dynamic
meter pricing and enforcement.
Touching on perspectives in terms of policy, the Interviewee emphasised the dependency on grants to
implement new projects. Recently, Seattle and Minneapolis got funding for their project “to price the
curb with automated tools”; Mr. WHEELER hopes that “they will move forward and inform other
cities”. Otherwise, he admits that the day-to-day operations by the Transportation Department are
mostly ad hoc because of limited resources and driven by complaints from residents and merchants.
Still, the department is pro-active in promoting streetscape projects and proposals to shift parking
zones.
Today’s challenges partly mirror those of 2011, insofar as there is a finite parking supply and a tremen-
dous demand. Much boils down to “getting vehicles to follow city regulations”: often the “curb activity
does not match regulation” and it is frequently used for drop-off or illegal parking (e.g., not in the right
direction) which may force cars on the road to change lanes or “even block a train, delaying hundreds
of people”. An idea could be to set “cameras on trains to take photographs and issue citations”. In the
past few years, the uptick in e-commerce, the upscaling of ride-hailing companies (raising a “huge chal-
lenge” for curb management), and the spreading of autonomous vehicles have been points of concern.
Often, the City cannot regulate on its own, as the prerogative is held by the State. In this respect,
says the Respondent, the pandemic emergency softened the restrictions imposed on the transportation
department activities and shortened decisional circuit, thus facilitating changes. More generally, it is
usual that technology takes precedence over regulation, making the tension between the will to “let
technology go forward” and the need for regulation palpable. Similar tensions are also felt strongly
when it comes to encouraging softer modes of transportation by means of changes that go counter to
particular habits or interests.
Figure 9: Cost structure of the 2011-2014 SFPark project.
Source of the data: [34, 29].
4.2. St Pete Beach, Florida, United States
4.2.1. City Context and Launch of the Smart Parking Project
The City of St. Pete Beach, a coastal community in Pinellas County, Florida (USA), with a population
of about 10,000 resident and a much larger seasonal visitor base, piloted an on-street smart parking
program in 2021 to alleviate the heavy traffic and in particular address the challenges of beachside
parking demand. Under unchanged parking supply, i.e., with around 1,300 (diagonal and parallel)
beach parking spaces, including both permitted and paid parking, the program revolved around the
installation on the metered spaces of approximately 750 radar ground sensors by the company Libelium,
transmitting real-time availability data to a cloud operated byConure, which was displayed on the City’s
website and on a ParkMobile app, also used for payment. The initial pilot was launched for free on 9th
Avenue, before expanding in May 2021 to all parking areas in the southernmost district of Pass-a-Grille
(one of the city’s busiest waterfront districts, for which there is mainly one way in and one way out,
with a long-stretch street along the beach). In parallel, the existing free on-demand electric shuttle
(called Freebee) expanded its rides, even though public transit to the southern beaches remains scarce,
partly due to the residents’ objections to having buses on the road. While plans for a SP roll-out in the
whole city were envisioned, in early 2023, the City Commissioner decided to pause the program.
Parking rates were $4/h from Monday to Friday; $4.75/h over the weekends and a $25/day flat rate for
parking lots at boat ramps and on public holidays. Payments are made through the ParkMobile app
or through the 36 parking meters shown in Fig. 10. Residents have access to parking permits. Lastly,
note that two-hour free public parking is provided along 8th Avenue, to promote shopping.
4.2.2. Insights from Michelle GONZALEZ, former Transportation and Parking Director for the City of
St Pete Beach, USA
Main purpose and evolution of the project. Parking was widely regarded as an issue. But our Inter-
viewee, Ms GONZALEZ, explains that one of the main initial goals was actually to divert traffic away
from the beach-side road by showing drivers the lack of vacant spaces and urging them to park else-
where (or even choose another beach). Indeed, the configuration of the beach-side road implies that
drivers entering it will not miss a free spot along it. Communication and marketing efforts were made
to educate the public to the existence of this solution. The program was suspended and the ground
sensors in 2023 for ‘political reasons’ and ‘aesthetic issues’, notably to restore the historical character
of the place.
Sensor technology. Residents’ concerns played a significant role in the choice of SP hardware and its
appraisal. In particular, cameras were deliberately avoided because of privacy concerns on their part:
despite their potential, ANPR and cameras “might not have been a very popular tool to use” in that
community. After the sensors (which are thin disks on the ground) were installed, some residents ex-
pressed dissatisfaction for aesthetic reasons, because they might not fit a historic place.
In terms of performance, “the sensors initially performed well, but issues began to arise around Novem-
ber 2022. At that point, the program had been running for just over a year. We worked with the vendor
to replace and recalibrate the sensors,” Ms GONZALEZ said, pointing to the need of yearly routine
maintenance. At that point, before maintenance, 25% of the sensors possibly exhibited malfunctions.
Financial perspective. Financing the project was “not an issue” for the city. The pilot was offered
mostly for free by the vendor and then the direct implementation cost amounted to $25,000/year, with
a prospective full SP cost of order $100,000/year (tentative figure), to be compared with an annual
parking revenue around $4,000,000. (Now that the project is over, excess parking revenue finances
a hurricane mitigation fund). SP costs would possibly have been outweighed by additional parking
revenue. Parking revenue grew over the course of the project, but this was only coincidental and due to
a rise in parking rates rose during, Ms GONZALEZ explains. ”The solution was not centered around
revenue generation”.
Impact on traffic. There were qualitative observations of heavy traffic prior to the implementation of
the project, but no quantitative diagnosis. The project was halted before it reached its final expansion
stage and its impact on traffic was never assessed quantitatively. There was no report of a visible impact
on traffic.
Users’ satisfaction. According to the Interviewee, a lot of positive feedback was received from users
(mostly local drivers) in the first stage. However, after about one year, concomitantly with the emerging
sensor deficiencies, some users reported inaccuracies. One of the causes for the complaints about
inaccuracies, Ms. GONZALEZ says, is that a parking spot shown as vacant could get busy while a
driver was heading for it; given that the road is quite busy with drivers looking for parking, being
outrun by another driver may have been a common problem. On the other hand, hardware deficiencies
were also observed by the staff on the field. In any event, this eroded drivers’ confidence, generating
complaints and undermining public acceptance.
At a broader scale (not specifically for St Pete Beach), ParkMobile users express satisfaction with the
app with few concerns around Payment processing problems, interface, stability, low customer support,
account security, and device compatibility.
Figure 10: Parking Zones and Pay Stations in St Pete Beach.
Source of the geolocalised data:[35], OpenStreetMap. The figure was produced by the authors.
Actual benefits. The City previously relied on manual operations (including chalking of tires) by 5
parking enforcement officers (3 active on a daily basis) to ensure compliance; about 4,000 citations were
issued each year. The SP system enabled City officers to work more efficiently and directed them to
relevant spaces, so that, with the same staff, the number of citations a year was tripled. At the same
time, SP also probably increased compliance.
Personal opinion on perspectives. Ms. GONZALEZ thinks that SP would have had a larger impact
if it had been deployed city-wide, so that people can make a fully informed decision as to where to
drive and try to park. The idea of installing a variable message sign (VMS) indicating if parking was
saturated or not had been going around. Parking reservation could also have been considered in the
future, but not in the first stage, and it would not have been a solution to all problems. Overall, she
recommends choosing solutions that are customisable, flexible and integrable; in particular, collecting
all relevant information in the same database is a non-negligible asset.
From a broader perspective, Ms. GONZALEZ insists that SP initiatives should strongly depend on the
location one considers, even in Florida. In big metropolises like Miami, above all one should give people
options on how they want to travel and promote transit. In smaller cities with poorer public transit
possibilities, the situation is different. “There is no one-size-fits-all” solution.
4.3. Penang Island, Malaysia
4.3.1. City Context and Launch of the Smart Parking Project
Penang, with a population of nearly 1.8 million inhabitants, is a State of Malaysia which spreads across
Penang Island and the mainland. Travelling by car is largely ingrained in local people’s habits and
parking demand far exceeds supply, especially in the city of George Town (on the Eastern coast of the
island), where public parking is generally saturated. Creations of more parking spaces to remedy their
shortage are strongly limited by the land space that can be used for this purpose. Parking options
consist of public (Government-owned and managed) parking spaces on the curb, and exclusively private
off-street parking. The former are much cheaper, with typical costs around 0.8 US $ per hour, as of
early 2025, as compared to US $3 for private parking. Therefore, drivers prefer parking on-street and
are often ready to cruise for public parking. This is particularly true in the centre of George Town,
where people may commute for work, to go shopping, and available public parking is generally very
scarce.
As part of Penang 2030 vision, the Penang Island and Seberang Perai City Councils (MBPP & MBSP)
launched an SP initiative in August 2019 to manage the constrained urban space, teaming up with
HeiTech Padu Berhad for the development of the system, Sigfox for sensor transmission, and Xperanti
for IoT 0G network. As of February 2025, the system covered 37,000 parking spots, about 24,000 on the
mainland and 13,000 on the island, using surface-mounted (ground) sensors for detection, powered by
long-life batteries that are suppsed to last up to ten years, and license plate recognition for enforcement.
Real-time information is communicated to a central dashboard used by City officers and it is also made
available to drivers via the Penang Smart Parking mobile application, which enables users to locate and
navigate to vacant spots, pay the parking fee, and possibly extend it. According to the official figures
communicated to us, the application has been downloaded over 1.5 million times as of early 2025 and
there were 293,000 active users in January 2025. (Incidentally, the year after the implementation, i.e.,
in 2020, a study based on a survey of around 600 people had arrived at the conclusion that only a third
of residents were aware of the SP application and that not enough publicity had been made about it
[36].)
4.3.2. Insights from Ms. Nurbayah Iswanis Binti Ishak, Deputy Accountant at Penang Island City
Council
Main purpose and evolution of the project. The Interviewee, Deputy Accountant at Penang Island City
Council, thinks that it is one of the governmental missions of the City Councils to provide people
with affordable options to travel by car, in parallel to promoting transit and walking. In particular, in
light of the car-centered habits of Penang citizens and the restricted land available to construct more
surface parking, SP appears as a service that enhances drivers’ experience, despite the aforementioned
constraints.
Furthermore, as part of the Clean and Green initiative, SP is also aimed at “reducing paper use” (notably
for citations) and “reducing cruising” by indicating where there are vacant spots, or redirecting drivers
to private parking (knowing that drivers tend to search for the cheaper option of parking on the curb
in the first place).
Sensor technology. The City and its providers opted for ground sensors, which are claimed to take less
than 30 minutes to mount on each spot, and managed to equip most of the parking spaces in George
Town (12,000 sensors initially, then increased to 13,000, for 18,000 on-street spaces) as well as on the
mainland (24,000 sensors).
Overall, the sensors are perceived as working well, with allegedly more than 90% accuracy. Nonetheless,
it may happen that the staff on the field observers that sensors malfunction or break, in which case the
inaccuracies are reported to the vendor. Sensors tend to be “overpredict” the occupation, that is to
stay that spaces are reported as occupied when they are actually vacant.
Financial perspective. Thanks to a private finance initiative, the City Council did not have to make any
substantial investment for the implementation of the system. Instead, the agreement with the system
developer relied on sharing the parking revenue (details of the sharing agreement are confidential).
In terms of financial added value, the SP system provided an efficient way to track revenue in real-time
and to help enforcement officers on the ground control parking compliance. Besides, an increase of the
public parking rate to US $1.6 was due for March 2025, generating some frustration in the population,
but deemed necessary to maintain service quality (possibly including sensor maintenance) and security.
However, it should be underlined that public on-street parking remains considerably cheaper than
private off-street alternatives, as providing affordable public parking is regarded as a governmental
mission; accordingly, it is not the goal of the City Council to maximise parking revenue, which “is not
the main (source of) revenue”.
That being said, significant losses in revenue occur whenever the SP system is down and these are
considered a major challenge by the Interviewee. In these situations, due to the centralised nature of
the system, both payment and parking enforcement are affected and, as a result, drivers are informed
on social media, notably, that they can park freely. Such breakdowns are reported to the vendor and
happen “at least once a year”.
Users’ satisfaction. Among complaints from drivers, the Deputy Accountant lists frustration that there
is not more parking space (which she says cannot be remedied because “we do not have much land in
Penang, we cannot expand our parking infrastructure”) and that public parking fees are planned to
increase. Regarding the SP smartphone application ( Penang Smart Parking ), it is largely used. While
some users express concerns about missing functionalities, the unavailability of the service from time
to time, compatibility and account security problems, others appreciate its efficiency. 2
Impact on traffic. Some impressive figures are mentioned on corporate websites about the impact of SP
on the cruising traffic in Penang, e.g., 50 percent reduction in the time needed for users to find parking
and 30 percent reduction in CO 2 emissions, but their origin cannot be sourced, which casts doubt
on their reliability. The Interviewee indicates that these figures do not come from the Department.
Nonetheless, since SP helps drivers locate unoccupied parking spaces throughout Penang or redirect to
a private parking option in case no public space is available, she is convinced that qualitatively SP has
had a positive effect on traffic.
Actual benefits. The introduction of SP has facilitated parking enforcement in a cost-effective way,
without public capital expenditure, and it has “reduced paper use”.
Personal opinion on perspectives. The Interviewee agrees that making parking easier cannot be the
be-all and end-all of transportation policy and that the City Council has to promote walking and usage
public transportation. However, she thinks that these goals should be conducted in parallel to the
deployment of SP and that they are not directly in conflict, because presently citizens prefer using
private cars and public parking is saturated in any event. (For this reason, she does not expect the
planned hike in parking rate to significantly affect parking tension.)
4.4. Douala, Cameroon
4.4.1. City Context
With a population around 4.5 million inhabitants, Douala is the largest city in Cameroon and its
economic capital, notably thanks to its harbour. Its population tripled between 1980 and 2000 and
keeps growing at a brisk pace. The city routinely suffers from congestion and many complain about the
lack of parking spaces, especially in the business districts, and the chaotic parking situation.
On-street parking is charged at a rate 100 CFA Francs (around €0.15) per hour, or 500 CFA Francs
for the whole day; this amount can be paid directly to municipal agents on the ground. Note that, as
of 2024, the city was looking for a service provider in charge of parking enforcement. The numbering
and marking on the ground of parking spaces is quite recent. A pilot study for smart on-street parking,
2We cannot comment on how user-friendly the application actually is, because we managed to download and install
the app without problems, but cannot use it from abroad.
involving online payment and real-time occupancy monitoring on about 200 parking spaces, was started
in 2021 with the company EZ Park. In 2025, the company put to test a more autonomous solution.
4.4.2. Insights from Ms. Caroline SACK KENDEM, CEO of EZ Park
Caroline SACK KENDEM, who founded the EZ Park start-up in 2019 and now heads this company,
answered our questions.
Motivations. An “entrepreneur at heart”, Ms. SACK KENDEM realised that congestion was becoming
a paramount issue in several African metropolises, including Douala, and was eager to provide an IoT
solution to the more and more acute parking problem. She has observed that, when they need to go to
a place with high parking tension, residents often “choose to be chauffeured” there and let the chauffeur
in the car while they run errands. For longer stays, people need to park in peripheral streets or on
the pavement, no private parking is supplied by e.g. their firm. The Interviewee set to offer a solution
that would be operational not only for Douala, Cameroon, but all over Africa. Beyond Douala, she also
prospects the market in Ivory Coast, Nigeria, Zambia, and Rwanda. She targeted on-street SP because
the “technological barrier is higher” there, which makes it harder for competitors to enter the market.
Implementation of the service. The first version of the service was developed with the technological
collaboration of a French company and, after all technical difficulties had been solved, it was put to
the test as a pilot study on a parking zone with 200∼300 dedicated and marked spaces in Douala from
November 2021 to April 2022. This first phase revolved around a mobile application where drivers
could register their licence plate and pay for their parking online. The system registered 600 to 700
subscriptions in the period; users were able to pay online, but not to check for vacant spots. A back-office
dashboard enabled city officers to monitor payments and centralise field data in real time, including
the licence plates of illegally parked cars. To control parking, 10 agents already in charge of parking
enforcement were enrolled in the pilot and had to take photographs of the licence plates of parked cars,
whereby they could determine which ones had no transaction record in the system.
A second, more autonomous SP solution was launched at the end of 2024 and was still under test at the
time of our interview. Rather than extensive manual control, this IoT solution relies on sensors buried
in the ground and able to detect the presence of a vehicle in real time, but also to communicate with a
contactless pass in the parked car and operate a transaction. The sensors are equipped with a battery
that can last up to three hours in case of power cuts. Installing them “does not represent a significant
financial burden”.
Actual benefits. A first major benefit for cities, says the Respondent, is that the SP solution markedly
increases their parking revenue. While manual parking enforcement was partly ineffective in Douala,
she details that the parking revenue for the zone of interest “was multiplied by 4” during the first pilot.
This is also related to the specifics of parking enforcement by agents, who are typically assigned a fixed
minimum amount to collect every day; this is an exhausting job, especially in harsh weather conditions,
in the heat or with heavy rainfall, and without SP guidance agents do not complete their task in the
most efficient way. The digital solution “optimises their operations” and reduces the tensions with
drivers. Finally, the cashless solution is a step forward, insofar as drivers can no longer “argue that
they have no cash” in order to escape payment and park for free. Nevertheless, Ms. SACK KENDEM
claims that users were very satisfied with the convenience of this mobile solution.
Difficulties. Many difficulties mentioned by the Interviewee are related to financial disagreements with
municipal services, particularly in Cameroon, and conflicts between political and economic interests.
For instance, all the cities she engaged with are unwilling to dismiss their parking enforcement agents; a
less human-power-intensive control solution thus requires assigning these agents different tasks. Besides,
the solution needs to be approved by different stakeholders in the municipal services and they can have
conflicting views.
There was also major disagreement as to when the revenue should be shared, i.e., as soon as a parking
payment is made, following the entrepreneur’s desire, or at the end of the month, as imposed by the
Douala municipality, while city officials in Ivory Coast are more flexible in this regard. Finally, the
parking rate is too low. While it was set at 100 CFA Francs ( €0.15) at the time of the interview, she
argues that it should be raised to 300 or 500 Francs for the solution to be profitable. This rise would
also urge people to park farther away, on cheaper parking spots, and then use a dedicated shuttle or
bus to their destination, an idea shared by municipalities.
Impact on traffic. Ms. SACK KENDEM is not sure that the pilot had an impact on congestion, but
she thinks that drivers heading for the pilot parking zone spent less time searching for parking.
Personal feedback and perspectives. Regarding the first pilot, the Interviewee highlights that massive
communication on the radio and on TV was needed beforehand, in addition to duly marking (i.e.,
painting) the involved parking spaces. As a result of these efforts, she believes that virtually all local
drivers were aware of the digital solution.
She does not plan to extend the SP solution to the whole city, as she considers that it should be
restricted to the zones with maximal traffic and parking tension.
Eventually, she notes that some cities (e.g., in Ivory Coast) have shown a clear interest for an on-street
parking reservation option. She believes that this is practically doable, but for an increased rate and
only for a fraction (10%, 15%?) of the equipped parking supply. This option would not necessarily urge
people to drive more because the “parking rate would be an obstacle”.
4.5. Montpellier, France
4.5.1. City Context and Launch of the On-Street Parking Project
Montpellier is a city of 310,000 inhabitants (615,000 if the whole urban area is included) located in
the South of France, close to the Mediterranean coast. Its public transportation network consists of 5
tramway lines and 41 bus lines. In the city centre, there is a sizable pedestrian area. The city is known
for its pro-active transportation policy and in December 2023 became the first French metropolis to
make public transportation free for residents.
In parallel, while the street network was redesigned in 2022, adding up to the constraints faced by
motorists, Montpellier insisted that transport modes should not be regarded as conflictual and invested
in the development of SP and of a “parking observatory”, and the design of a smart parking guidance
algorithm. The urban core is served by about 20 off-street parking facilities and over 20,000 on-street
parking spaces, for commerce, transit, tourism, etc. There are four distinct paid parking zones, totalling
18,000 spaces: a green zone for day-long parking, an orange zone to park for less than 5 hours, a yellow
zone for parking durations typically less than 2 hours, and a red zone for short-term parking (typically
less than half an hour); parking rates in the first three zones range from 1 € to 2.5€ per hour. Such a
differentiation encourages greater turnover in saturated areas while keeping short-term stops affordable.
To control parking payment and gather valuable spatial data, 3 (and then 5) ANPR cars have been
deployed since 2018, replacing manual control by agents on the ground. These vehicles, equipped with
high-tech roof-mounted cameras and driven in turn by a pool of 15 staff members, scan up to 10,000
license plates per day. In addition, ground sensors have been installed on spaces reserved for disabled
people and parking spaces in the red zone.
4.5.2. Insights from our collaboration with the transport operator
At the end of 2023, we initiated a collaboration with Transports de l’agglom´ eration de Montpellier
(TaM), which manages and operates transport by virtue of a delegation of public service, in order to
guide the design of their smart parking algorithm. In the frame of this collaboration, we have conducted
field surveys, analysed massive parking data, and interacted with several TaM executives. The following
summarises the insights we have gained.
Motivations. The fleet of ANPR cars primarily target the control of parking payment. In addition, the
Montpellier metropolitan mobility department was eager to leverage the massive data thus collected to
gain insight into spatially and temporally resolved parking occupancy, via an online observatory that
feeds on the collected data. Finally, a couple of years after the deployment of the system, TaM invested
in the development of a mobile-based smart navigation application, which guides drivers to a suitable
parking area close to their destination, in light of parking occupancy predictions.
Technology. Montpellier opted for ANPR-based mobile surveillance, offering a more cost-efficient and
scalable solution than ground sensors. The detection and geolocation of licence plates, and the pro-
cessing and management of the collected data are operated by private companies, Arvoo and Egis,
respectively, as of 2025. The accuracy of this approach for the detection of parked cars (including
closely packed cars) was first demonstrated to TaM in specific street settings. Then, in the frame-
work of our contract with TaM, we quantitatively evaluated this accuracy on a larger scale in 2025 by
manually checking the occupancy of parking spaces (clustered in “polygons” of 1 to 20 spaces) along
the typical trajectory of an ANPR car (with two agents performing their counts independently) and
comparing these geolocated manual counts with the simultaneous ANPR detections, extracted from an
online database. We found that the ANPR detections were quite accurate, with an error (root-mean
square error (RMSE) around 0.85 cars per polygon; absolute error (AE) around 0.5 cars per polygon)
that was only slightly larger than the difference between the manual counts performed by the two agents
(RMSE≃ 0.65 cars/polygon; AE≃ 0.4 cars/polygon). While these raw detections were thus quite accu-
rate, technical problems were noticed in the post-processing stage, when the per-polygon occupancy is
aggregated spatio-temporally, and remedial action was suggested.
Insights into parking behaviour. Globally, the occupancy (on a Thursday in June, with no exceptional
event) was around 60%∼ 70%, but high spatial disparities were observed, with an average occupancy
around 70% in the urban core and around 40% ∼ 50% in more peripheral areas, all days of the week
(these averages only weakly depend on the weekday between Monday and Saturday). As expected,
spaces reserved for delivery or for disabled people exhibit much lower occupancy. Interestingly, we
noticed that the massive and finely resolved data collected by TaM also reveal finer features of mobility
behaviour, such as slightly higher on-street parking occupancy when the weather was exceptionally cold
for the considered month (particularly in April and May) or hot (for most months, except the summer
holidays). Besides, more rainfall systematically correlates with higher parking occupancy.
Financial aspects. TaM relies on the ANPR fleet for paid parking control (exclusive of the control of
non-paid areas, whether they correspond to free parking or illegal parking). The parking revenue thus
heavily depends on the quality of the control by ANPR cars. Nevertheless, Montpellier opted for a fairly
permissive policy, in that for each detected mismatch between parked cars and parking transactions a
photograph of the situation taken by the ANPR car is carefully controlled (e.g., to see if the driver was
still aboard the car, or walking to the parking meter) and uncertainty benefits the driver; more than
half of the suspicions of unpaid parking are thus rejected.
Besides, residents and disabled people benefit from specific rates. Parking meters (and the mobile
application) deliver free parking tickets to disabled people. Whenever the corresponding licence plates
are detected by the ANPR cars, agents are sent on scooters to check the presence of a valid disabled card.
Regarding residents, cars displaying residential parking permits represent about half of the occupancy
overall, but generate only a small fraction (about 20%) of the parking revenue.
Users’ satisfaction. To collect feedback from motorists, we administered a small field survey on October
23rd, 2024, asking a dozen people who had just parked and passers-by for their impressions. The results
were enlightening. Most drivers declared that they had searched for parking. But, when asked how long
it had taken them to find their parking space, at least two of the surveyed drivers manifestly overstated
their parking search time (or understood parking search in a very loose sense), insofar as they reported
search times of 10 and 15 minutes, whereas several vacant spaces could easily be found in the immediate
surroundings. This may echo the observation that actual search times might not be as long as often
declared [2]. Most drivers indicated that they had parked in the best possible location, very close to
their destination (less than 50 meters away), but distances to the destination of 400 m, 500 m, and
1 km were also reported (which is not impossible, given that some had parked at the periphery of the
pedestrian area). Finally, some global impressions were that it is “hard to park in the city centre; one
has to park far away”, “parking is expensive and there is no space to park; I moved my shop out of the
city centre for that reason” (a shop owner), “parking is too expensive”, “with a disabled card, parking
is not an issue”, etc., but these statements should probably be nuanced in light of well known response
biases.
Impact on cruising traffic. Traffic information is released on open-data platforms by the mobility de-
partment of Montpellier, but no quantitative analysis of the specific impact of SP-related initiatives is
foreseen, to our knowledge.
4.6. Soissons, France
4.6.1. City Context and Launch of the Smart Parking Project
Soissons is a historic city located 100 kilometers to the North East of Paris, in the midst of a rural
territory, where mobility largely revolves around private cars. It has a population of less than 30,000
inhabitants, or about 50,000 if one includes the metropolitan area.
Drivers largely rely on surface parking, both on the curb (268 on-street spaces in the city centre) and
in parking lots (in the centre and at its periphery), even though there are also some off-street parking
facilities. The first 15 minutes of on-street parking are free in the city centre. For fairly short-term
stays beyond that duration, there are “blue zones” that were free for stays of less than 1 or 2 hours or
had a preferential rate (the policy changed over the years). In case a driver fails to pay, they are liable
for an increased fee, which altogether brought an alleged revenue of €27,000 to the city in 2024.
An SP system was deployed in 2018. In 2020, about 1,000 parking spaces were monitored, both on
the curb ( Rue du Coll` ege, Rue du Commerce, Rue Georges Muzart, Rue Jean de Dormans, Rue Saint
Martin, Rue Saint Quentin) and in surface lots (Esplanade du Mail, Place Dauphine, Place de l’Evˆ ech´ e,
Place de l’hˆ otel de Ville, Place Fernand Marquigny, Place Mantoue, Square Bonnenfant), out of 1,700
in the city centre; their live status could be checked on a dedicated smartphone application, and further
extension of the coverage was planned. However, a few years ago, the vendor went bankrupt and the
project evolved.
4.6.2. Insights from Mr. Kevin BOULANGER, IT Manager for the city of Soissons
In Soissons, the SP project was largely supported by the IT Department, both in terms of resources
and humanpower. In particular, the position of officer responsible for Smart City projects, officially
created in 2016 and operational from 2018 to 2023, was integrated in the same department as IT. Kevin
BOULANGER, who manages the Soissons IT Department and has taken the lead of the Smart City
project, is our Interviewee.
Main purpose and evolution. He believes that the main motivation for the SP project was the political
will to encourage Smart City initiatives. Despite its small size, the city of Soissons is quite dynamic
in this regard. There was also a desire to gain insight into actual behaviours, in order to influence
them, and to limit the number of cars parked for an excessive duration ( stuck cars ). As an additional
motivation, some frustration had been expressed by some drivers unable to find a parking space, e.g. in
the centrally located shopping street Rue Saint-Martin, but this is largely due to ingrained car-centric
habits in this territory and the “wish to park right away, right in front of the targeted shop, and not
50 m or 100 m away”.
The SP project first involved a dedicated smartphone application (called ParkingMap) where drivers
could spot available spaces in real time. However, there were technical problems, including geolocation,
data reliability, and the “need to zoom on the screen to see available spots” (which cannot be done while
driving). Therefore, the application was discontinued when the ParkingMap start-up went bankrupt.
Presently, parking data are in the process of being integrated into the broader-scope application of the
city (powered by NeoCity), which has been downloaded more than 8,000 times overall and can guide
the user to a destination if they click on it. But the collected data are already displayed on a centralised
dashboard for city officers, with updates every 5 minutes approximately (the Respondent was not sure
about this point) and more reliability than in the previous user application; they are used to get finer
insight into citizens’ habits and mobility patterns in a privacy-respective way, in order to improve the
urban mobility policy. A further goal was to increase the turnover of parked cars and prevent excessively
long parking.
Sensors. Initially, the SP system relied on ground sensors for a good part, notably for curbside parking.
But, as the project evolved, the cost-effectiveness of the solutions was more and more taken into account
and camera-based sensors (connected with the 3G network) were favoured over ground sensors. Indeed,
while ground sensors only cover one spot each, the overhead cameras installed by UpCity typically
monitor 5 on-street spaces each and around 15 spaces in parking lots, hence a choice to focus on surface
parking lots. It is interesting to note that technical difficulties have led to the exclusion of some areas
from the SP system, notably, parking areas with high turnover rates, which are harder to monitor,
and areas where trees and vegetation obstruct overhead vision. Overall, close to 150 sensors have been
installed and cover shy of 1,500 surface parking spaces, at least 350 of which are on the curb (including
150 free spaces), scattered across the city centre.
In terms of accuracy, results with the first system were deemed problematic for multiple reasons, but
the new system. provides “more reliable” results.
In parallel, the occupation of “siloed” off-street parking facilities is monitored by a counter at the gate,
which is “the most reliable solution”.
Information display. Live parking information is displayed on six parking guidance boards at the en-
trance of the city, which show the number of vacant spots in the different parking lots, and six parking
guidance boards in the city centre, which point to the closest parking lot and indicate the number of
vacant spots in it.
Financial perspective. Financially, the French State subsidised 50% of the expenses; the remaining costs
have been supported by the IT Department in Soissons. Once the city had invested €180,000 to install
the sensors, the annual subscription for the SP service amounts to €5,600 only. Another €200,000 was
spent on the parking guidance boards.
Impact on traffic and actual benefits. Qualitatively, there is no severe problem of traffic or parking
search in the city, either before or after implementation of SP, although some times of the day and areas
are busier. Quantitatively, the ex ante traffic conditions were not precisely diagnosed.
Above all, the ability to monitor parking occupancy and turnover in real time serves qualitative purposes
in terms of policy, ultimately aimed at reducing the number of stuck cars (cars parked for an excessive
duration) and at promoting soft modes in the city centre.
Users’ satisfaction. The Interview states that residents first questioned the need to deploy an SP system,
but the system is now well established in the city. Regarding the smartphone application, the initial
version was not satisfactory from a technical viewpoint and a new one is currently being integrated into
the broader-scope city application.
Personal opinion on perspectives. Since its first deployment, the SP system has substantially evolved.
Vendors, the policy officer in charge, as well as the dominant sensor technology have changed, but the
project goes on, with a revised focus on cost-effective SP monitoring strategies (which enable to monitor
a large number of spaces with only one sensor). The IT Manager sees no point in proposing a parking
space reservation service in the future and he thinks this would be quite hard to implement on public
on-street spaces.
4.7. Grand Paris Seine Ouest, South West of Paris, France
4.7.1. City Context and Launch of the Smart Parking Project
Grand Paris Seine Ouest (GPSO) is an intermunicipal structure gathering 8 towns in the affluent South
West periphery of Paris, namely, Meudon, Boulogne-Billancourt, S` evres, Chaville, Issy-les-Moulineaux,
Marnes-la-Coquette, Vanves, Ville-d’Avray, and 320,000 residents. Compared to other similar struc-
tures, GPSO has a wide range of competences, in particular in relation to all types of (paid) parking.
Overall, it manages 22,000 on-street spaces, as well as 5,000 spaces in off-street car parks. Non-
residential on-street parking rates generally compare favourably with off-street ones; there are a few
different parking zones, with hourly rates ranging from €1 to €2 and maximal durations above which
the cost abruptly soars. Parking is free from 7pm onwards. For parking management, GPSO signed
two public service delegation contracts for parking; the bid led by INDIGO company was selected.
While parking control and enforcement is still performed by agents in the field, GPSO launched an SP
initiative in 2022-2023, with an operational start in 2024, to monitor the availability of on-street parking
spaces, in addition to the already existing solution for off-street parking. This pilot study is conducted
in two different towns : 567 on-street spaces were equipped in Issy-les-Moulineaux, along with 265
spaces in the centre of S` evres, pending evaluation and possible extension. The parking information
thus gathered feeds a dashboard used by technical services and city officials, and it is also displayed on
parking guidance boards; no dedicated smartphone application has been developed.
4.7.2. Insights from Mr. Hugo LAMBERT, Deputy Director for Mobility at GPSO
Motivations. Mr. Hugo LAMBERT, Deputy Director for Mobility at GPSO, sees two main motivations
to the implementation of on-street SP. Firstly, there is strong political will to make city centres easily
accessible and to have a high turnover of parked cars, so that patrons can quickly find a space to
park. This is partly inspired by the “no parking, no business” motto and the fear that patrons would
favour department stores and their large parking lots otherwise. Besides, some towns in GPSO have
a reputation for actively promoting innovation, notably smart-city technology. Secondly, he says that
there is significant parking tension on the territory; in particular, on Wednesdays and Saturdays, outdoor
market days, it is very difficult to park on the curb. Given that drivers prefer parking on street, informing
them might spare them some cruising time and possibly redirect them to an off-street car park if they
realise that on-street spaces are saturated.
Sensors. Sensors are comprised of both ground sensors and overhead cameras mounted on streetlamps;
they transmit parking information every five seconds. Camera-based systems are increasingly favoured,
because they “cover more parking spaces (if there is no visual obstruction), they are more reliable over
time and, at the end of the day, cheaper”. As far as the Interviewee can tell, detection accuracy has
not been a problem and the weather has not raised specific issues (but there have not been particularly
severe weather conditions since their installation). Incidentally, he notes that around Christmas time,
some anecdotal issues were encountered, because the cameras were slightly moved while Christmas
street lighting was set up, which required new calibration. He also mentions that he has heard of other
cities which have experienced parking detection with CCTV surveillance cameras; problems arose when
their focus was changed for surveillance reasons, but this represents only a small fraction of time.
By contrast, Mr LAMBERT deems that first-generation ground sensors (those released around 2010)
yield less reliable data and that, in any event, their battery needs to be changed at some point and
they may occasionally get damaged after being driven over so frequently”. There are still a number of
ground sensors in the GPSO SP implementation, but their batteries are gradually changed for longer-life
batteries.
Information display. Real-time parking information is conveyed to drivers in the city centre via sign
boards mimicking those for off-street parking; four levels of parking availability were defined based on
arbitrary occupancy thresholds and for each parking area the corresponding board shows the current
level based on the data from the sensors. The Respondent expressed some doubt as to how easily they
could be read in real time and mentioned that a revised design could better do the job.
Technical services also have access to parking information a centralised digital dashboard, updated
every few minutes. As parking enforcement still lies in the hands of agents on the ground, which echoes
“a strong political will” and “public disapproval of ANPR cars”, the SP dashboard plays a less central
role than in other contexts (see, e.g., the case of Penang) and the server may therefore be used less
intensively, but no connection issue has been reported since the start of the project.
On the other hand, GPSO has no plan to release a dedicated smartphone application at present. “We
do not want yet another application, everybody is tired of having 50 applications on their smartphones”,
Mr. LAMBERT explains.
Impact on traffic. To the best of the Respondent’s knowledge, the traffic situation was not accurately
diagnosed before the start of the pilot SP study. However, a quantitative analysis of the impact of the
SP pilot was upcoming at the time of the interview, in which the parking situation (notably occupancy
and turnover) in the first weeks after the start of the project (in lieu of “just before”) would be compared
with the situation at a later stage, with an established SP system. In parallel, questionnaires would
help gauge the drivers’ awareness of it and get their feedback.
Personal opinion and perspectives. The Respondent has underlined the importance of the political
decisions which, on the one hand, have promoted innovative action on the path towards a smart city
and, on the other hand, intend to preserve ‘manual’ parking enforcement by agents on the ground, who
are visible to citizens and can inform them. He admits that this choice is easier to justify in a territory
like GPSO where illegal (i.e., not paid) parking is limited.
There is also a balance to strike between informing the drivers about the availability of parking spaces
and urging them to drive to car parks, instead of cruising through the streets. Off-street parks are indeed
generally much less occupied than on-street spaces and not more expensive, but drivers tend to prefer
on-street spaces. From that perspective, GPSO’s choice to display the saturation levels of different
on-street parking areas, i.e., at an aggregate level, on variable-message signs makes sense, while going
further and helping drivers identify vacant on-street spots in real-time may backfire and strengthen the
drivers’ tendency to look for on-street parking. More generally speaking, Mr. LAMBERT is convinced
of the need to incentivise walking and the use of public transportation, but this should not be framed
as a conflict between modes that takes place at the drivers’ expense.
4.8. Frauenfeld, Canton of Thurgau, Switzerland
4.8.1. City Context and Launch of the SP Project
The town of Frauenfeld is the capital of the Canton of Thurgau in Switzerland and has a population
of roughly 25,000. Its transportation network consists of a railway station, two connections to the A7
motorway, and (for urban transport) 5 bus lines. Regarding parking, the town features 4 blue zones
mainly dedicated to residential parking (with parking permits) and different areas for short-term (up to
30 minutes or 1 hour), medium-term (up to 2 or 4 hours), and longer-term parking. The parking rates
are around CHF 1 (i.e., €1.1) per hour and can be paid at the parking meter or on the ParkingPay
mobile application. In addition, there are 14 outdoor and indoor parking lots, among which 5 or 6 are
owned by the town.
In November 2023, Frauenfeld launched a pilot SP project to better understand and manage parking
demand in its historic town center. The pilot covered about 500 parking spaces in mostly outdoor car
parks. After its evaluation in 2024, the project was continued and now relies on 24 overhead cameras
(including CCTV cameras) mounted on facades, streetlamps, and even church towers.
4.8.2. Insights from Peter KOCH, Director of the Communication and Economy Service) and Andrea
FOSSATI, CEO of Parquery AG
Our interview with Mr. Peter KOCH, Head of the Communication and Economy service at Frauenfeld,
and Dr. Andrea FOSSATI, Co-Founder & CEO of Parquery AG, provided additional insight into this
use case.
Motivations. Mr. KOCH indicated that “the project goal was never to provide live steering of traffic,
but rather to give the public reliable information and for the city to gain insights into actual parking
behaviours”. Furthermore, the SP programme is not dedicated to parking control and no information
is communicated to the police to enforce parking regulation. Consistently with this idea, no licence
plate recognition is performed and the town only receives information about parking occupancy and
duration, and entry and exit statistics. Finally, the municipal services (in particular the construction
and traffic services) “currently see no need for live data”.
SP technology. The official argument for the technological choice is that cameras were used, and not
ground sensors, to avoid high installation and maintenance costs associated with the latter, which have
to be installed in each individual parking spot. To maximise the benefits drawn from each camera, the
locations were chosen for their ability to capture occupancy data from multiple parking spaces.
Privacy concerns seem to have been carefully considered and privacy was built in the design of the
system, to ease potential residents’ concerns, thanks to low image resolution and high camera posi-
tioning. Once the locations of spots have been defined (thanks to Google Maps), images are captured
every 2 minutes (which results from a “technical trade-off between power consumption” and accuracy),
processed in the cloud, and continuously deleted thereafter; the city only receives numerical parking
data. Each camera is equipped with a battery, to overcome the periods of time when public electricity
is cut.
Regarding the accuracy of the detection, the Interviewees answered that, once properly trained, the
system achieves “above 99% accuracy” in general, but is more challenged if the camera captures a
distant view of the scene, in which case specific re-training may be required and the accuracy decreases
to 95%. Thus, the position of the camera is the feature that impacts accuracy most. The weather is not
critical, except when there is thick fog, and the system is operational at night, thanks to street lighting.
Data availability. The parking data collected every two minutes are made available to the public via
their integration in the Regio Frauenfeld mobile application 3 and Canton Thurgau open data plat-
form 4. Statistics on occupancy rates, parking durations, entries, and exits, are thus easily accessible.
Integration with the most common navigation applications is an ongoing effort.
Financial aspects. Financially, the project was a significant but manageable investment. The cost of
approximately CHF 100,000 was equally shared between the City of Frauenfeld and the Canton of Zurich
and annual operating expenses may amount to about CHF 30,000. (In comparison, boards to display
the information come at a cost of about CHF 1,000,000.)
Actual benefits and impact on traffic. While the impact on traffic or search times was not checked and no
survey was conducted to get public feedback, the Interviewees’ impression is that SP has had a positive
impact. Above all, they noted that “political leaders gave positive feedback, recognizing the system’s
contribution to making city life easier and communication more transparent”. They did not hear of
any dissent based on the argument that the system might promote car use by improving convenience,
rather than encourage a modal shift toward public transport.
From the perspective of drivers, no frustrations were reported. Citizens understood that the system
was designed as a ”parking information system” rather than a ”guidance system”, and therefore did
not expect perfectly live, always-accurate data. While external factors such as camera angle, daytime,
and weather occasionally influenced detection accuracy, overall performance was considered robust and
reliable.
Finally, for the last two case studies, we turn to cities that have pondered on-street parking management
strategies, but eventually chose not to implement on-street SP systems.
3This application is written in German and does not provide translation to any other language, which may limit its
use by visitors.
4https://data.tg.ch/explore/dataset/frauenfeld-2
4.9. Zurich, Switzerland
4.9.1. City Context and Parking Policy
Zurich, Switzerland’s economic hub and largest city with a municipal population of 440,000, is known for
its efficient public transport and progressive urban policies. Daily mobility flows are intensive, insofar
as there are around 400,000 commuters every day (including intra-city commuters), more than 60% of
whom come from outside the city boundaries [37, 38]. Over the decades, mobility flows have drastically
changed: while about half of the commuters used their private cars in the 1980s, the private-car share
sunk to 26% in the last decade [37, 38], and even less for intra-city commuters. Meanwhile, 62% of
commuters relied on public transportation.
The restrictive parking policy that has been implemented for several decades has played a role in this
shift [28], with the introduction of parking maxima and the removal of on-street parking from residential
areas. As of 2019, the city had 42,200 public street parking spaces (a lower figure than in 2010 despite
the population growth), the majority of which are in “blue” zones mostly for residential parking. An
additional 25,700 spaces are accessible to the public in parking lots and car parks [39]. The trend was
pursued between 2022 and 2025, with the dismantling of on-street parking spaces and improvements
targetting bicycles and pedestrians, as well as enhanced green spaces. It also directly follows from these
policies that the city is widely reported to face high parking tension.
The City implemented a real-time parking guidance system to 36 of its largest and busiest parking
facilities, with over 200 on-street signs guiding drivers to nearby facilities. For on-street parking, there
is no such smart-parking equivalent. Peak on-street parking demand is between 11:00–13:00 on weekdays
and in a broader time range on Saturdays in the city centre, and on-street parking rates are set on a
static schedule: CHF 4 (about €4.4) per hour in the city centre, with maximal parking duration between
30 minutes and 2 hours, typically. These rates have to be compared with the corresponding off-street
parking rates, which typically amount to CHF 4 for the first hour and CHF 5 for every following hour
(even though there are longer-term options); parking at night and on Sundays is cheaper.
4.9.2. Insights from Mr. Georg SPYCHER, General Manager, Parking Zurich AG
Standpoint on parking-related measures. Mr. SPYCHER (the General Manager of Parking Zurich AG )
admits from the outset that drivers in Zurich often express frustration, but the city has intentionally
avoided enhancing private car convenience: its policies are designed to discourage car ownership and
instead promote public transport and shared mobility. “Looking forward, Zurich plans to further adjust
parking fees and reduce maximum parking durations to continue promoting sustainable urban mobility”,
he said.
Vision on urban mobility. In Mr. SPYCHER’s vision, “parking must evolve to accommodate au-
tonomous and self-driving cars, while also ensuring accessibility for people with disabilities. Car shar-
ing, in particular, is a positive step as it reduces congestion and the overall demand for parking”. A
prime example of Zurich’s approach is the Parkhaus Z¨ urichhorn, which balances 220 spaces among 240
tenants with 30–70 spaces dynamically available public spaces, optimizing usage across different groups
rather than simply expanding capacity.
Parking in Zurich is therefore not just about cars and spaces; it reflects a deliberate strategy to shape
urban mobility. Payment remains simple and structured, while public transport is prioritized as the
backbone of movement across the city. The message is clear: Zurich’s future lies in shared, sustainable,
and technologically adaptive mobility rather than in accommodating more private vehicles.
4.10. Perth, Australia
4.10.1. City Context
The metropolitan area of Perth, the capital of Western Australia, is home to over 2 million inhabitants.
A vibrant commercial and cultural hub, the city of Perth has municipal population of 110,000 residents,
but an estimated 200,000 employees, students, and visitors commute into the city centre every day [40].
To support this pulse of activity, the city manages a significant on-street parking inventory, with over
6,000 pay-and-display bays across the central district, in addition to multiple car parks managed by
commercial entities or by Perth. However, to cope with the commuting flows, since 2010 the transport
planning authorities have officially endeavoured to restrict parking in the central area and promote
public transportation and/or park-and-ride for commuters [40]. In parallel, parking meters have been
modernised and ticketless pay-by-phone solutions have been deployed. Parking control by automatic
number-plate recognition (ANPR) is also enforced at car parks.
Pricewise, the first 15 minutes of parking are free. Then, the on-street parking rate depends on the zone,
with a rate of AU $7.00 (about US $4.60) per hour in the central business district (CBD) and AU $3.00
in Crawley/Nedlands. Maximum time limits (typically, 1 hour or 2 hours) are displayed on dedicated
kerbside signage, but there also exists an online interactive map 5 to find parking-related information.
Recently, hourly and daily rates rose modestly (by AU $0.20 to AU $0.60 per hour) and a AU $5.00 flat
night fee was reinstated in place of free night-time parking.
4.11. Insights from Justin McKIRDY, Executive Director of Urban Mobility with DTMI, Western Aus-
tralia
Right from the start, Justin McKIRDY, Executive Director of Urban Mobility with DTMI in Western
Australia, highlighted that different levels of responsibility ought to be distinguished on the topic of
parking, even though they are entangled. First, the role of the metropolitan transport authority (to
which he belongs) should not be mistaken for that of the city, which operates on-street parking. Second,
parking policy – which results from an agreement between the city and the State in the frame of the
now 24-year-old Parking Management Act – is partly disconnected from regulation (to control park-
ing locally). Third, parking measures differentiate between different parking types (residential/tenant
parking, etc.).
Differentiated parking tools and goals. Besides the contactless payment option (and the camera-based
ANPR in place at the gates of off-street car parks), no other SP strategy has been implemented for
on-street parking. Instead, according to the Respondent, the major goal is to keep excess traffic out
of the city centre as much as possible, notably by capping the parking supply; parking management
is particularly critical in the “corridors’ leading into and out of the CBD core area. Parking in this
area should be mostly on a short-term basis (as prompted by the free first-15-minute measure) between
peak hours, or even on a very short time basis in some specific bays. Incidentally, the Respondent does
not have much information about the impact of the free 15-minute policy, given that the related policy
is managed by the City of Perth. As for commuters, who require longer-term parking, Mr McKIRDY
stated that it is desirable that they be intercepted at the periphery and encouraged to walk or use
public transport.
Parking occupancy and traffic. Given the necessarily limited parking supply, on-street parking in the
CBD is well used, but not to the point that drivers “queue in front of these [spaces]”. Parking occupancy
values are in the hands of the City of Perth6, and not the Department of Transport, but the Respondent
is not convinced of the accuracy of these data. Since underused parking bays may be an argument for
reducing the City levy, there might also be risk of a bias towards occupancy underestimation. Still,
even though traffic is congested at peak hours (a couple of hours in the afternoon, in particular), the
parking restrictions have borne some fruit, preventing a surge in traffic in the CBD.
Main levers of action. Occupancy signage for car parks exists in the CBD, but Mr. McKIRDY is not
sure that this plays a major role. By contrast, there is anecdotal evidence that drivers are sensitive
to the cost of parking, insofar as the cheaper or free parking options are filled first (e.g., the free East
block before the paying West block).
5https://perth.maps.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=29d9a05a4f394f02a89084997e11566e
6Brief releases indicate that surveys are commissioned annually to assess parking occupancy; their latest edition
reports occupancies typically between 40% and 80%, for car parks and street parking indiscriminately, with only a couple
of oversaturated areas.
Upcoming challenges. Rather than technological innovations facilitating parking search, the Interviewee
reckons the the major upcoming challenges are the acceptance and adaptation to the revised parking
legislation and the public wish to contain traffic in the CBD in spite of paramount demographic changes
in the years to come. Indeed, the CBD is “transitioning from a business-oriented area to a mixed-use
area”, with projections of a massive surge in the number of residents, arriving at a density that is new
for Perth. In parallel, business is also expected to intensify in the CBD. These two evolutions will tend
to generate significant car traffic and require more parking spaces, even as the transport authorities
strive to keep traffic out of the CBD.
Looking forward, the city is steering mobility with a broader vision. “Transitioning and growing pop-
ulations require more dynamic and sophisticated solutions for sustainable public transport, the city is
working in that direction”.
5. Discussion and Conclusion
In summary, our survey of actual city implementations of on-street SP shed light on a diversity of
contexts, technological choices, deployment scales, and project viabilities. Ground sensors were used in
widely mediatised pilots in the early 2010s and are still used in more recent, larger-scale implementa-
tions, but since 2018∼2020 some cities have gradually shifted to static cameras with computer-vision
capabilities, which enable them to monitor more parking spaces per device and may be more durable.
In parallel, a growing number of cities are resorting to mobile cameras aboard ANPR cars for parking
control, which provide extensive spatial coverage, at the expense of a low temporal resolution; but
only a fraction of them have overtly decided to turn the data thus collected into a bona fide SPS with
real-time parking availability information communicated to technical services and/or drivers. In terms
of market stage, recent years have witnessed an apparent consolidation of the SP industrial ecosystem,
with several mergers between companies.
We complemented this objective survey with various use cases around the world, asking stakeholders
for an open feedback; this sometimes brought some nuances to the publicised “success stories” that can
be read online. What emerges from these discussions is that contexts and situations dramatically differ,
not only with respect to city sizes and chosen SP implementations, but also regarding the main goals
of the SP projects. In this section, we provide actionable insight for researchers and practitioners by
discussing the extent to which these diverse goals have been achieved in practice and by highlighting
some points that require particular attention for an SP project, in light of our case studies.
5.1. Reduced Congestion and Parking Search Times in City Centres
Cruising for parking is often mentioned as a substantial contributor to congestion in cities, with popular
figures for the share of cruising traffic over total traffic in the 20–30% range [41, 42], even though recent
trajectory-based evidence suggests to take reports of very long city-wide averages of search times (say,
longer than 5 minutes) with a grain of salt [2]. Does SP actually manage to expedite parking search?
The best documented evidence in support of this assertion comes from the pioneering SFpark project in
San Francisco (2011-2014). Thanks to a data-based dynamic adjustment of parking rates, improvements
in parking availability were achieved, with measured occupancies in pilot areas that more often met the
60% to 80% target range (+31% of the time, and up to +100% of the time on block faces with high
payment compliance); reported search times were also reduced (by 5 minutes in pilot areas, vs 1 minute
in control areas, where the parking tension was already less acute beforehand) [32]. That being said,
it is also critical to remember that SFpark was a pilot study that covered only a part of the on-street
spaces in the city centre and that was terminated 3 years after its start (hardware issues emerged about
one year into the project).
The case of Penang gives an example of a larger-scale, city-wide, and durable deployment, which did
not use the data for parking rate adjustments. While there are claims of substantial reductions in CO 2
emissions and parking search times (by 30% and 50%, respectively) thanks to SP in Penang, the evidence
supporting these claims is scant. For other implementations, on much smaller scale, stakeholders did
not observe visible changes in traffic; note that awareness of the SP solution is critical in this case,
particularly if the transport authority hopes to influence drivers’ behaviour in an educational way, by
informing them about the scarcity of available on-street parking spaces, e.g. along the Passe-A-Grille
beach in St Pete Beach.
More generally, rigorous evaluations, measuring before–after changes in cruising, search times, or emis-
sions with standardised methods, remain scarce. In the vast majority of our case studies, a quantitative
diagnosis of the traffic and parking search conditions before (and possible after) SP implementation is
missing. In short, SP offers several levers for
• reducing search times, by displaying real-time parking information on sign boards or on a mobile
application, guiding drivers to spaces that are likely to be vacant, or enabling them to reserve a
space in advance (an option hardly considered for on-street parking),
• soothing the cruising traffic, using either a passive strategy, i.e., just informing drivers about the
current parking tension in busy areas and hoping they will choose to park elsewhere, like in St
Pete Beach or GPSO, or a more interventional one, such as adjusting parking rates, like in San
Francisco.
But, in practice there are but few actual measurements of reductions in congestion and parking search
times to this day.
5.2. Increased Parking Revenue for Cities
Revenue and cost-effectiveness must be judged on lifecycle economics, balancing SP installation, op-
eration, and maintenance costs against possibly higher fee collection and lower enforcement costs.
Interestingly, in our case studies, city councils did not have to substantially invest for SP deployment
in general, as the system deployment and sensor installation costs were often funded by a national or
federal grant, or bundled into a monthly subscription fee, or taken up by the vendor/service provider in
exchange for shared parking revenue (e.g., in Penang). Capital risk is thus shifted off the city balance
sheet, but the practicalities of revenue sharing are of paramount importance, as demonstrated by the
Penang and Douala examples.
Parking revenue was reported to increase slightly in the SFpark pilot, mostly due to the smart payment
option and longer allowed parking durations, but by far not sufficiently to cover sensor replacement
and maintenance without new budgetary arrangements. Typically, one expects SP to increase parking
revenue by enhancing compliance, when it is low. In this vein, the small-scale Douala pilot exhibited
a dramatic increase in parking revenue. On a larger scale, Penang fully relies on SP to collect parking
revenue, which facilitates payment and control, but bears on the city’s finances on the few days when
the service is down.
In situations where no substantial increase in revenue is expected, material costs come into play in a
more critical way, and many of our Interviewees said camera-based systems were favoured over ground
sensors because of their higher cost effectiveness, as they cover multiple spaces and may be more durable.
5.3. Data-based Pricing Strategies To Tweak Occupancy and Turnover Rate
Changing the parking rate is the most straightforward lever to control curb occupancy and turnover.
The pricing strategy can be applied at a very aggregate level, e.g., by setting high parking rates to
disincentivize private car use. For instance, this was part of Zurich’s long-term policy, along with the
limitation of the on-street supply and investments in public transport; it effected a profound modal
shift, with an estimated 17% decline in automobile ownership from 2000–2017, illustrating the potential
of pricing combined with broader mobility strategy. At an intermediate scale, when rates vary with the
area, for instance when the city is divided into a few zones associated with different parking conditions
and colours (e.g., red/orange/yellow/green in Montpellier), turnover rate and occupancy can be mod-
ulated in space [43] (e.g., to promote very high turnover on red parking spaces in Montpellier). These
pricing strategies, operating at an aggregate level, are not data-intensive, in that they require only time
and space averaged occupancy and turnover data.
On the other hand, dynamic pricing at the scale of the block-face requires finer-grained measurements,
hardly achievable without SP. SFpark operationalised this idea by adjusting rates every eight weeks to
reach target occupancies (e.g., 60–80% target ranges on 2 opposite streets Lombard & Chestnut) and
observed improved availability in pilot blocks relative to controls. The effectiveness of this strategy
hinges on visible, predictable rules, and considerable citizens’ awareness: alongside high-frequency
occupancy monitoring, clear political communication is crucial. Also, block-level variations in parking
rates may run counter to the local habits, for instance in Europe, where such spatial heterogeneity is
unusual. Besides, price adjustments must be calibrated based on the local price elasticity, which may
vary considerably at the block level [41].
5.4. Drivers’ and Citizens’ Satisfaction
Regarding the citizens’ satisfaction, a first concern resides in the installation of the sensors. Here,
too, the local context is key. In some contexts, SP sensors have not raised particular concerns: no
such concern was voiced by our Interviewees in San Francisco, Douala, Penang. In others contexts,
considerable efforts have been made to avoid giving citizens the impression of encroachments on their
privacy, notably in Frauenfeld and St Pete Beach, where this issue guided the choice of sensor technology.
In some sites (including St Pete Beach), aesthetic concerns associated with the visibility of the sensors
have also played an important role.
Turning to drivers’ satisfaction, obviously, price is a major concern. If the SP deployment coincides
with a general hike in parking rates, dissatisfaction can be expected (and this was carefully avoided in
the San Francisco pilot, by refraining from systematically raising rates). Then, real-time SP data are
only beneficial to drivers that are aware of, and use, these data. In this respect, limited awareness of SP
information [30] is often a critical problem, especially in small-scale implementations. Incidentally, while
reviewing implementations globally, we phoned unknown shop owners and service managers in areas
where SP had been deployed, notably in Pozuelo de Alarcon, near Madrid, Spain, and found that they
were not aware of any SP deployment. In a similar vein, in the situations where a mobile application
was developed to display real-time parking availability, the application may be hard to identify. In many
cases, particularly small-scale ones, the original application was discontinued, either because the vendor
went bankrupt (see the case of ParkingMaps in Soissons) or the application changed names, possibly
after integration into a broader application (see the integration of Mosman (Australia)’s SP application
into New South Wales’ Park’nPay). Alternatively, there may be multiple competing applications,
among which it is hard to find which ones feed on live SP data (e.g., on the data communicated by the
sensors in Los Angeles, USA).
By contrast, the case study of Penang gives an example where one specific mobile application is widely
downloaded (over 1.5 million times, according to official sources) and used – notably, but not exclusively,
to pay for parking. Still, even in this context of broad SP awareness, some dissatisfaction may be
voiced, for instance users complaining about device compatibility and interface problems, along with
server failures now and then. Public acceptance of SP assistance may be easier to garner if the system
is presented as an information service, as for Frauenfeld’s camera system, rather than an indispensable,
be-all-and-end-all parking utility.
Despite their investment in SP, some cities (see the case study on GPSO) decided to turn away from
the development of a mobile phone application and to favour the physical installation of dynamic
sign boards that display live information about parking availability at an aggregate scale (see GPSO,
Soissons). Stakeholders in these cases argue that there is widespread fatigue with the multiplicity of
smartphone applications. On the other hand, stakeholders in other contexts (e.g., Perth) have the
feeling that such signage has little influence on drivers’ routing choices.
Last but not least, trust in the SP-related information is naturally vital. The St Pete Beach case study
hinted at the skepticism of some users about the real-time parking availability data. Press clippings
point to even larger skepticism during the short-lived SP project in Nice, France. With regard to
reliability, inaccuracies due to the hardware may rightly be in the firing line, as field experience has
evinced degrading performance of ground sensors, in particular, over time scales of one or two years:
sensor lifetimes are shortened by battery depletion, street works and harsh environments; for example,
SFPark experienced progressive sensor failures that curtailed long-term benefits after the pilot phase.
But it might also be that, while someone was driving to a spot marked as vacant on the application,
another driver pulled in in the meantime, which is equally frustrating for the driver.
5.5. Points of attention and vulnerabilities
Beyond the foregoing strengths and limitations with respect to the attainment of SP goals, we would
like to conclude by underlining some points of attention that emerged from the review and case studies.
Clearly, SP systems are neither a silver bullet nor a trivial add-on, but complex socio-technical infras-
tructures that succeed only when reliability, pricing, and governance are aligned. As such, smaller-scale
implementations and pilots are particularly vulnerable to changing political will, discontinued fund-
ing, or defaulting start-ups. The regional context also matters: if an SP project blooms on propitious
ground, i.e., if SP seems to be on the rise regionally (e.g., in New South Wales, Australia, or in the
United Arab Emirates), regional integration of the SP application can be contemplated. Alternatively,
functional integration into a broader-scope application (not just for parking information and smart
payment, but also for other city services) is a means to gain visibility and overcome the application
saturation problem.
In any event, for practitioners, the emphasis should be on building systems that can persist in time.
Besides the sensor technology, the financial model also matters in this regard: sustainable maintenance
budgets or well-structured public–private partnerships are prerequisites to keeping systems trustworthy
over time. Above all, occupancy data must translate into actionable policy, whether through dynamic
pricing, enforcement, or communication. Otherwise the technology risks delivering visibility without
impact.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge financial support by Transports de l’agglom´ eration de Montpellier and from CNRS
through the MITI interdisciplinary programs.
Declaration of competing interests
Funding was received from Transports de l’agglom´ eration de Montpellierfor the analysis of their smart
parking data and assistance in the development of their guidance algorithm. The associated contract
explicitly mentions that the parties can freely communicate and publish their findings.
Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the manuscript preparation
process
Conversational AI (ChatGPT) was used in the first stage to identify resources related to smart parking
implementations and to flesh out related paragraphs. Then the references and the numbers were all
manually checked by the authors and the final version of the manuscript was written by the authors.
The interviews were conducted and summarised without resorting to AI.
References
[1] D. Shoup, Parking and the City, Chapter 41, pages 378–388, Routledge, 2018.
[2] S. Saki, T. Hagen, Cruising for parking again: Measuring the ground truth and using survival
analysis to reveal the determinants of the duration, Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
Practice 183 (2024) 104045.
[3] R. C. Hampshire, D. Shoup, What share of traffic is cruising for parking?, Journal of Transport
Economics and Policy (JTEP) 52 (3) (2018) 184–201.
[4] R. Luke, Car ownership perceptions and intentions amongst south african students, Journal of
Transport Geography 66 (2018) 135–143.
[5] K. W. Axhausen, J. W. Polak, M. Boltze, Effectiveness of parking guidance and information
systems: recent evidence from nottingham and frankfurt am main, in: 63rd Annual Meeting:
Compendium of Technical Papers, Vol. 37, Institute of Transportation Engineers, 1993.
[6] G. Pierce, D. Shoup, Getting the prices right: an evaluation of pricing parking by demand in san
francisco, Journal of the american planning association 79 (1) (2013) 67–81.
[7] T. Lin, H. Rivano, F. Le Mou¨ el, A survey of smart parking solutions, IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems 18 (12) (2017) 3229–3253.
[8] S. Shaheen, Smart parking management field test: A bay area rapid transit (bart) district parking
demonstration (2005).
[9] V. Paidi, H. Fleyeh, J. H˚ akansson, R. G. Nyberg, Smart parking sensors, technologies and appli-
cations for open parking lots: a review, IET Intelligent Transport Systems 12 (8) (2018) 735–741.
[10] S. Evenepoel, J. Van Ooteghem, S. Verbrugge, D. Colle, M. Pickavet, On-street smart parking
networks at a fraction of their cost: performance analysis of a sampling approach, Transactions on
Emerging Telecommunications Technologies 25 (1) (2014) 136–149.
[11] F. Bock, S. Di Martino, A. Origlia, Smart parking: Using a crowd of taxis to sense on-street
parking space availability, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 21 (2) (2019)
496–508.
[12] I. Aydin, M. Karakose, E. Karakose, A navigation and reservation based smart parking platform
using genetic optimization for smart cities, in: 2017 5th International Istanbul Smart Grid and
Cities Congress and Fair (ICSG), IEEE, 2017, pp. 120–124.
[13] T. Lin, H. Rivano, F. Le Mou¨ el, Urban infrastructure deployment for wireless on-street parking
sensor networks, Procedia Engineering 115 (2015) 29–36.
[14] N. Cahyadi, P. Dorand, N. R. F. Rozi, L. A. Haq, R. I. Maulana, A literature review for under-
standing the development of smart parking systems, Journal of Informatics and Communication
Technology (JICT) 5 (1) (2023) 46–56.
[15] M. I. Idris, Y. Leng, E. Tamil, N. Noor, Z. Razak, et al., Car park system: A review of smart
parking system and its technology, Information technology journal 8 (2) (2009) 101–113.
[16] J. J. Barriga, J. Sulca, J. L. Le´ on, A. Ulloa, D. Portero, R. Andrade, S. G. Yoo, Smart parking: A
literature review from the technological perspective, Applied Sciences 9 (21) (2019) 4569.
[17] W. T. Jacobson, Limitations on municipal use of parking meters, Journal of Criminal Law and
Criminology (1931-1951) 40 (5) (1950) 601–606.
[18] S. Yang, Z. S. Qian, Turning meter transactions data into occupancy and payment behavioral
information for on-street parking, Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 78
(2017) 165–182. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2017.02.022.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0968090X17300621
[19] D. Jordon, R. Hampshire, T. Fabusuyi, Estimating parking occupancy using smart meter transac-
tion data (06 2021). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2106.02270.
[20] A. Ghezzi, F. Renga, R. Balocco, P. Pescetto, Mobile payment applications: Offer state of the art
in the italian market, info 12 (5) (2010) 3–22.
[21] San Francisco Municipal Transportation Agency, SFpark Pilot Program, https://www.sfmta.
com/projects/sfpark-pilot-program, accessed: 2024-09-11 (2024).
URL https://www.sfmta.com/projects/sfpark-pilot-program
[22] S. Yang, W. Ma, X. Pi, S. Qian, A deep learning approach to real-time parking occupancy prediction
in transportation networks incorporating multiple spatio-temporal data sources, Transportation
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 107 (2019) 248–265.
[23] Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, A comparative study of parking occupancy prediction methods
considering parking type and parking scale, Journal of Advanced Transportation 2020 (1) (2020)
5624586.
[24] K. Vakrinou, E. G. Mantouka, E. I. Vlahogianni, Leveraging multisource data for off-street parking
occupancy prediction: A twofold analysis, International Journal of Transportation Science and
Technology (2025).
[25] S. Brooke, S. Ison, M. Quddus, On-street parking search: A uk local authority perspective, Journal
of Transport and Land Use 10 (1) (2017) 13–26.
[26] Mercedes Benz Parktronic system (PTS), Electromagnetic detection system for park-
ing operation, https://archive.ph/20140306172348/http://worldwide.espacenet.com/
publicationDetails/biblio#selection-838.0-838.1, accessed: 2025-07-07 (2009-05-01).
URL https://archive.ph/20140306172348/http://worldwide.espacenet.com/
publicationDetails/biblio#selection-838.0-838.1
[27] M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Griffith, A. D. Joseph, R. Katz, A. Konwinski, G. Lee, D. Patterson,
A. Rabkin, I. Stoica, et al., A view of cloud computing, Communications of the ACM 53 (4) (2010)
50–58.
[28] M. Kodransky, G. Hermann, Europe’s parking U-Turn: From accomodation to regulation, Institute
for Transportation and Development Policy New York, NY, USA, 2010.
[29] SFMTA, Pilot project evaluation, Municipal Transportation Agency (2014).
[30] G. C. A. Peng, M. B. Nunes, L. Zheng, Impacts of low citizen awareness and usage in smart
city services: The case of london’s smart parking system, Information Systems and e-Business
Management 15 (4) (2017) 845–876.
[31] A. Millard-Ball, R. C. Hampshire, R. Weinberger, Parking behaviour: The curious lack of cruising
for parking in san francisco, Land Use Policy 91 (2020) 103918.
[32] SFMTA, Sfpark pilot project evaluation – the sfmta’s evaluation of the benefits of the sfpark pilot
project), Evaluation report, SFMTA (2014).
URL https://www.sfmta.com/sites/default/files/reports-and-documents/2018/08/
sfpark_pilot_project_evaluation.pdf
[33] SFMTA, Parking sensor data guide, Technical report, SFMTA (2013).
URL https://www.sfmta.com/sites/default/files/reports-and-documents/2018/08/
sfpark_dataguide_parkingsensordata.pdf
[34] SFMTA, Putting theory to practice, Municipal Transportation Agency (2014).
[35] City of St. Pete Beach, City of st. pete beach parking inventory-arcgis web app
viewer – cspb, https://cspb.maps.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=
2407139865104f5e8ac82d7f117321dc, accessed: 2025-11-10 (2025).
[36] D. M. H. Kee, S. L. Ching, An assessment of the viability of the smart parking system: The case
of a smart city initiative in malaysia, Global Business and Organizational Excellence 39 (5) (2020)
26–34.
[37] . Stadt Z¨ urich, Analyse – arbeiter in bewegung, Tech. rep., Stadt Z¨ urich (2013).
[38] . Stadt Z¨ urich, Statistik – z¨ urcher pendler*innen setzen immer st¨ arker auf¨Ov und velo, Tech. rep.,
Stadt Z¨ urich (2022).
[39] . Stadt Z¨ urich, Stadtverkehr 2025 – bericht 2019, Tech. rep., Stadt Z¨ urich (2019).
URL www.stadt-zuerich.ch/stadtverkehr2025
[40] . Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Economics (BITRE), Population growth, jobs
growth and commuting flows in perth, Tech. rep., Department of Infrastructure and Transport
(2010).
[41] D. Shoup, The High Cost of Free Parking, American Planning Association, 2011.
[42] D. C. Shoup, Cruising for parking, Transport policy 13 (6) (2006) 479–486.
[43] N. Dutta, A. Nicolas, Searching for parking in a busy downtown district: an agent-based com-
putational and analytical model, in: 2021 International Symposium on Computer Science and
Intelligent Controls (ISCSIC), IEEE, 2021, pp. 348–354.