=== page 1 ===
MELBOURNE 
BUSKING  
HANDBOOK
2018
SUPPORTING THE CITY’S 
STREET PERFORMANCE  
AND MUSIC CULTURE

=== page 2 ===
melbourne.vic.gov.au
A CREATIVE CITY
Melbourne will be a place that inspires 
experimentation, innovation and creativity 
and fosters leaders of ideas and courage. 
Acknowledgement of Traditional Owners
The City of Melbourne respectfully acknowledges the Traditional Owners 
of the land, the Boon Wurrung and Woiwurrung (Wurundjeri) people 
of the Kulin Nation and pays respect to their Elders, past and present.

=== page 3 ===
To find out how you can participate in the decision-making process for City of Melbourne’s current and 
future initiatives, visit melbourne.vic.gov.au/participate
CONTENTS
Introduction 
2
Objectives and principles 
2
Definition and local law
5
Permit types
7
Permit application process
9
Application assessment safety, amenity & performance review 
11
Assessment criteria 
12
Level one review criteria 
13
Level two review criteria
14
Permit conditions, rights and responsibilities
16
Management of sound generated by busking 
21
Non-amplified busking zones 
23
Performance locations
25
Busking no-go zones
26
Making money from busking
27
Complaints, dispute resolution and compliance
28

=== page 4 ===
melbourne.vic.gov.au
2
The City of Melbourne is proud of its reputation for 
supporting lively street culture and greatly values the 
diversity of entertainment that buskers provide within 
public places. 
We are also committed to providing a safe, accessible and 
culturally sensitive environment for all visitors, workers 
and residents.
The City of Melbourne acknowledges that:
•	
Melbourne has a strong history of busking and 
buskers contribute to the character and culture of 
the City of Melbourne.
•	
Melbourne is internationally recognised as a city that 
supports music and busking. 
•	
Busking makes an important contribution to the cultural 
life within the city of Melbourne.
•	
Busking activity should not adversely affect public safety, 
pedestrian traffic or the amenity of a public place for 
city users.
The Melbourne Busking Handbook (‘the Handbook’) will 
assist performers, city visitors, businesses and residents to 
understand the rules for busking while ensuring that safety, 
access and amenity are maintained. We want to ensure that 
busking continues to flourish and remains a positive aspect 
of Melbourne city life.
INTRODUCTION

=== page 5 ===
Melbourne Busking Handbook
3
Objectives
The City of Melbourne will:
•	
Support and encourage busking performances to 
enhance the vibrancy, vitality, diversity and ambience 
of the city.
•	
Provide certainty and self-regulation to buskers within 
a clearly understood, fair and transparent operating 
framework for managing busking activities.
•	
Foster an environment that enables a range of busking 
performances in our city.
•	
Support the City of Melbourne’s Street Activity Policy 
2011 and connect to related corporate and strategic 
policies and plans including the Melbourne Music Plan 
and the Future Melbourne 2026 Plan, particularly the 
goals of A Creative City and A City for People.
Principles
Busking is managed according to the following 
guiding principles:
1. Appropriate location
Busking should only occur in those locations where the 
activity enhances the vibrancy and social activation of 
particular streets or precincts. 
2. Comfort
Busking should create a comfortable ambience in the 
public realm.
3. Diversity
Busking performances should positively engage passers-by 
and create a sense of interest and curiosity.
4. Safety and amenity
Busking must not compromise the amenity of an area 
or cause excessive noise, lead to excessive amplification, 
anti-social behaviour or other discomfort to the audience. 
Buskers have a responsibility to regulate their sound in 
accordance with the designated sound levels. 
(Refer to pg. 11)
5. Accessibility
Maintaining adequate clearance, busking should 
be integrated into the street in a way that does not 
significantly compromise circulation requirements for 
other street activities, pedestrian or traffic safety. 
OBJECTIVES AND PRINCIPLES

=== page 6 ===
4
melbourne.vic.gov.au

=== page 7 ===
Melbourne Busking Handbook
5
DEFINITION AND LOCAL LAW
What is busking?
Busking is the sounding or playing of a musical 
instrument, singing, giving a recitation or 
performing any conjuring, juggling, puppetry, 
mime, dance or other entertainment or 
doing any of those things concurrently. 
A busker is an entertainer who is actively providing
a performance in the public place in exchange 
for a donation.
Types of busking performances may include:
•	
Performing with an instrument or multiple 
instruments, conventional or self-constructed.
•	
Performing a song, dance routine, mime 
act, clowning, juggling, puppetry, comedy, 
recitation, magic or living statue act.
•	
Painting landscapes and chalk art.
•	
Performing a circle act.

=== page 8 ===
melbourne.vic.gov.au
6
What is not considered busking?
Any activity or demonstration involving the sale or 
exchange of merchandise, products and services is 
not busking. 
Busking permits will not be issued for any of the 
following activities:
•	
Vendors of any kind including but not limited to: glow 
sticks, flowers, jewellery, wire twisting, calligraphy, 
portraiture and caricature, printed poetry, photography, 
balloon sculptures, origami, games of chance, cosplay 
and soliciting donations for photos while dressed in 
character costumes, and other merchandise sellers.
•	
Fundraising, events, promotions, surveys, or advertising 
even if they involve any element of performance. 
•	
Touting or spruiking including religious spruiking 
or street preaching.
•	
Political rallying.
•	
Tarot card reading, palmistry and fortune telling.
•	
Massage, chiropractic treatment or any other 
physical manipulation.
•	
Face or body painting including henna and temporary 
tattoo applications.
•	
Animal acts or where animals are involved in any part 
of the performance.
•	
Begging.
Fundraising, events, promotions, 
surveys and advertising
Busking permits will not be issued to individuals, clubs or 
companies wanting to promote their business or activities 
or fundraise on behalf of another individual, organisation 
or entity even if they are engaging in a public performance 
to do so. 
Performers hired by a private organisation as part of an 
event, market or festival do not require a busking permit. 
However, event organisers must ensure that the relevant 
permits for the specific event have been obtained.
For more information about organising events, promotions 
and fundraising, visit the City of Melbourne website or 
contact 03 9658 9658. 
Relation to Legislation and 
Council Local Laws 
Under the Activities Local Law 2009 (‘Local Law’) 
a permit is required for selling goods or services in the 
public place. A permit is also required for soliciting trade 
and other street activity such as busking and displaying 
goods for sale in a public place. 
The Local Law allows the Council to make prescriptions to 
support the operation and enforcement of the local law. 
Prescription 84 prescribes the designated sound level for 
busking activity in the municipality. 
The Local Law also sets out the enforcement provisions 
for any offences for failing to comply with the Local Law. 
Do I need permission to busk?
Under the City of Melbourne’s Activities Local Law 2009 a 
permit is required for busking in a public place. A busking 
permit may also allow buskers to collect a donation, use 
an amplifier, as well as sell items such as CDs or artworks 
created while busking.

=== page 9 ===
Melbourne Busking Handbook
7
Restrictions apply to premium busking sites such as the 
Bourke Street Mall and designated circle act sites. Buskers 
are required to have the correct permit to perform in 
restricted areas.
Restricted and no-go zones are listed on the City of 
Melbourne website. 
Buskers are responsible for keeping up to date with 
restricted areas by checking the City of Melbourne website 
as the most up to date information will be listed online. 
Applicants must demonstrate that they meet the relevant 
Assessment Criteria (see pg. 13) for their intended permit 
type(s). 
There are four permit categories for busking:
1. General area permit
•	
Examples include musicians, singers, dancers, 
magicians, mimes, puppeteers and living statue artists 
•	
A general area permit allows buskers to perform in 
appropriate locations, except for the premium busking 
sites such as the Bourke Street Mall, designated circle act 
sites and other restricted areas as specified on the City 
of Melbourne website.
•	
Buskers applying for this permit type must demonstrate 
they meet the level one review criteria.
PERMIT TYPES

=== page 10 ===
melbourne.vic.gov.au
8
2. Circle act permit 
•	
Performances may incorporate elements of street 
theatre, puppetry, dance, comedy, fire manipulation, 
juggling, acrobatics and other circus skills.
•	
A circle act permit allows buskers to perform in 
designated locations. 
•	
Applies to performers who have a structured 
performance or routine that requires the audience to 
stop, watch and/ or participate.
•	
Buskers applying for this permit type must demonstrate 
they meet the level one review criteria.
•	
Upon request a comprehensive Public Liability Insurance 
policy must be held in order to be eligible for a 
circle act permit
A circle act permit may involve the use of the following 
substances and props: 
•	
Flammable fuels including Firewater, Shellsol, low odour 
kerosene, citronella and other low aromatic, inert fuels
•	
Swords, whips and knives and similar implements 
provided that they are modified for maximum safety
If not properly managed, some of these materials or 
substances have the potential to cause serious injury and 
damage to property and the environment.
A circle act permit will not involve the use 
of the following substances and props:
•	
Explosives, fireworks, flares.
•	
Fuels including blue kerosene, shellite, petrol, turpentine, 
diesel, methylated spirits and alcohol.
•	
Petrol motor power tools or props including chainsaws, 
grinders, whipper snippers and lawnmowers.
•	
Sharp implements not modified for safety such as saws, 
whips, swords, knives and similar implements.
Circle acts involving the use of flammable substances and/
or modified knives, whips and swords, will be assessed by a 
City of Melbourne representative and specialist busking peer 
assessors for circle act performers. 
Please note: Section 5AA of the Control of Weapons Act 
1990 provides that a person must not possess, use or carry a 
prohibited weapon (other than an imitation firearm) without 
an exemption under section 8B or an approval under section 
8C. The Act references swords, knives and some whips. For 
more information on items prohibited under the Act and how 
exemptions can be obtained. Please visit the Victoria 
Police website.
Circle acts may also be subject to additional criteria and 
conditions as advised by the specialist peer assessor and 
the City of Melbourne. 
Buskers will be required to demonstrate their skills and 
experience and demonstrate their understanding of safety 
for the public and themselves. 
3. Premium busking permit
(eg: Bourke Street Mall)
•	
A premium busking permit allows professional buskers to 
perform in designated locations, for example the Bourke 
Street Mall. Premium busking locations can be found on 
the City of Melbourne website.
•	
Buskers applying for this permit type must demonstrate 
that they have been busking with a general area permit 
for a minimum of six months before applying.
•	
Visiting professional acts seeking a temporary permit 
may apply without holding a general area permit first. 
•	
Buskers will need to demonstrate that they meet the 
level one and level two review criteria.
•	
Premium permit holders can perform in the general area 
and premium locations specified on their permits.

=== page 11 ===
Melbourne Busking Handbook
9
Approval and permit issue
Once an applicant has met all the requirements of the 
permit application process, a permit may be issued.
By accepting the permit, the busker agrees to fully comply 
with all of the conditions of the permit and the handbook.
The City of Melbourne reserves the right to approve 
or refuse an application and feedback will be given 
upon request.
Rights of appeal
If an applicant disagrees with an application decision, they 
may put their case in writing to City of Melbourne and 
request a review.
Please refer to the City of Melbourne website or phone 
03 9658 9658 for further application review information.
Reapplication process
Buskers who have a current busking permit and have 
previously attended an induction briefing or safety, amenity 
and performance review can reapply for a permit.
If a permit has expired by more than three months, it will 
not be renewed and a new application must be completed.
Premium permit holders may only reapply twice. After 
which, a new application must be completed.
Please refer to the City of Melbourne website or phone
03 9658 9658 for reapplication information.
All applicants are required to read and understand 
this Handbook, the full list of conditions (pg. 16) and 
the busking information on the City of Melbourne 
website before applying for a busking permit.
All applicants are required to:
•	
Complete an online application
•	
Pay the relevant fees
•	
Attend an induction briefing or safety, amenity 
and performance review as advised by the 
City of Melbourne
•	
Agree to adhere to permit terms and conditions. 
Please refer to the City of Melbourne 
website or phone 03 9658 9658 for detailed 
application information.
PERMIT APPLICATION 
PROCESS

=== page 12 ===
melbourne.vic.gov.au
10
Permit fees
Fees apply to all busking permit applications. 
The fees are as follows:
•	
Fee prices correct as at 1 January 2019 
(subject to change)
Permit transfers/refunds
Permits and permit fees are not refundable or transferable.  
Public Liability Insurance
Public Liability Insurance is third party insurance intended 
to protect the legal liabilities of a policy holder against 
claims made against them by members of the public and 
anybody else who might be physically injured and/or 
whose property may be damaged whilst the policy holder 
is performing. Many organisations including council events 
and festivals are now requesting evidence of this insurance 
from performers in order to contract them and/or issue 
permits to perform.
Council’s Public Liability Insurance covers the Council only 
and excludes cover for other parties including buskers. 
Therefore buskers are wholly responsible for all claims made 
against them for personal injury or property damage and it 
is recommended that buskers have their own Public Liability 
Insurance policy to cover their potential legal liabilities.
For more information about insurance, visit the City of 
Melbourne website or contact 03 9658 9658.
Group acts
Group acts are generally limited to four performers with 
larger groups assessed on a case-by-case basis. Additional 
permit conditions may be attached to permits for groups 
with more than four members. Each member of the group 
is required to hold an individual permit. The same busking 
conditions apply to individual, duo and group acts.
Age restrictions
The City of Melbourne reserves the right to impose 
conditions on approvals to busk for persons under the 
age of 16 years. Performers under the age of 16 must 
have parental or legal guardian consent to apply for a 
permit. Children under this age must have parental or legal 
guardian supervision at all times while performing.
* If you are busking as a member of a musical group or duo and you are selling the same CD or DVD, only one selling fee of $100 is applicable. 
All group members must have their own individual busking permit. 
FEE
PERMIT TYPE 
ADDITIONAL FEE FOR 
SELLING CDS, DVDS, OR 
APPROVED ARTWORKS 
MADE WHILE BUSKING 
(IF REQUIRED)
$30
Does not 
include 
premium 
permits
•	 General area 
and circle act 
permits valid for 
12 months
•	 Short term 
permits for 
interstate/
international
applicants which 
are valid for 
three months 
•	 Permit 
reapplications 
valid for 
12 months
$100
$70
•	 Premium permits 
valid for 12 
months
(including 
reapplications)
$50
•	 Short term 
premium permits 
for interstate/
international 
applicants which 
are valid for 
three months

=== page 13 ===
APPLICATION ASSESSMENT -
SAFETY, AMENITY AND PERFORMANCE REVIEW
Melbourne Busking Handbook
11
The City of Melbourne is responsible for effectively and 
safely managing activities in the public place. Buskers must 
also take responsibility for their actions while performing 
in a public place. Assessment of each application through a 
safety, amenity and performance review forms part of the 
busking application process. 
This review will determine if the act fits into the description 
of busking and assess the safety and amenity aspects of 
the performance in accordance with the guiding principles. 
All applications are assessed according to the relevant 
assessment criteria for each permit type. 
An audition is not required for general area buskers or 
circle act performers (unless the performance meets the 
additional criteria for circle acts or incorporates the use 
of fuels and props) within the City of Melbourne. However 
minimum performance standards must be evident in order 
to be eligible for a busking permit. 
Applications for premium permits, including Bourke Street 
Mall, will be assessed with additional quality criteria as 
well as a live audition. Short term interstate/international 
applications will be required to complete a separate 
pre-assessment.
Attending a safety, amenity 
and performance review
After initial assessment of a busking application, 
successful candidates will be required to 
participate in a safety and amenity review.
Please refer to the City of Melbourne website or 
phone 03 9658 9658 for detailed safety, amenity 
and performance review information.

=== page 14 ===
ASSESSMENT 
CRITERIA
melbourne.vic.gov.au
12

=== page 15 ===
Melbourne Busking Handbook
13
General area and circle act 
busking permits
Safety
•	
Attention to general safety – set up, personal safety, 
audience safety.
•	
What infrastructure and equipment is going to be used in 
the public place?
•	
Are cords, leads or wires safely secured?
•	
Understanding of potential risk of injury to audience 
or performer.
•	
Understanding of pedestrian access management.
•	
Understanding of sound in relation to safety 
(if applicable).
•	
Does the performer retain complete control of every 
aspect of their performance and is safety a concern?
Amenity
•	
Suitability of the act for the public place.
•	
Suitability of the act in relation to proposed performance 
sites (taking into account other city users and 
stakeholders).
•	
Suitability of the proposed infrastructure and equipment.
•	
Presentation and neatness of set-up.
•	
Understanding of sound management in relation to 
amenity (if applicable)
- amplification within prescribed levels and times 
- compliance with performance times
- a wide enough repertoire to avoid excessive repetition
  of material
- How would you monitor your sound so that you stay  
  within the prescribed levels? 
•	
Appropriateness of merchandise (if applicable).
•	
Interaction with public.
•	
Suitability of materials for use in a public place.
Performance
•	
Evidence of an act and repertoire (Is it busking?).
•	
Performance does not involve unacceptable activities:
- advertising or canvassing
- political or religious issues or rallying
•	
Suitability of the act for the public place, performance 
does not involve:
- Profane, obscene, indecent, insulting, discriminatory
  or threatening language or material 
- sexually explicit language or simulation of sexual acts
•	
Circle acts – is the performance suitable for a 
circle act permit?

Additional criteria for circle acts: 
Circle act performers who use flammable materials or 
modified knives, whips, swords or similar implements must 
hold an appropriately endorsed Public Liability Insurance 
policy in order to be eligible for a circle act Permit.  
•	
Approval is subject to the endorsement of a peer 
assessor to ensure that applicants have the requisite 
skills and experience to safely manage any dangerous 
goods used and demonstrate their understanding of 
safety for the public and themselves while using them.
•	
The performance space to be used must be clearly 
defined. Further instruction and advice will be given 
by peer assessors at the Safety & Assessment.
•	
Public property must not be damaged in the course 
of the performance. 
•	
Please note: Section 5AA of the Control of Weapons 
Act 1990 provides that a person must not possess, use 
or carry a prohibited weapon (other than an imitation 
firearm) without an exemption under section 8B or an 
approval under section 8C. The Act references swords, 
knives and some whips. For more information on items 
prohibited under the Act and how exemptions can be 
obtained. Please visit the Victoria Police website.
For performances that incorporate the use 
of fuels and props:
•	
A serviceable fire blanket or an appropriate serviceable 
fire extinguisher must be on site, visible and readily 
accessible for the duration of performances involving 
flammable materials (including time used for setting 
up and packing down). The fire blanket and/or fire 
extinguisher must meet the appropriate Australian 
standards. 
•	
All fuels that are to be used in the busking performance 
must be taken to the Safety & Amenity Review.
•	
All containers must be conspicuously marked with 
“HIGHLY FLAMMABLE”, in capital letters on both sides 
of the container.
•	
The dripping of any flammable liquid on the ground 
should be avoided at all costs. Buskers are responsible for 
ensuring that any drip stains are immediately cleaned up.
•	
Regular maintenance of all fire equipment including 
wicks and screws. Checks must be carried out prior to 
any public performance.
•	
All flammable fuels must be transported in accordance 
with the Code of Practice for the Storage and Handling 
of Dangerous Goods 2013 (i.e. with appropriate portable 
plastic or metal containers).
LEVEL ONE
REVIEW CRITERIA

=== page 16 ===
melbourne.vic.gov.au
14
Premium busking permits
In addition to the level one criteria, the following 
criteria will apply to Premium busking permits: 
Performance
•	
Evidence of ability to entertain and engage an audience.
•	
Polished performance.
•	
Evidence of a highly developed repertoire. e.g. Does 
the performer know a wide variety of music and songs?  
Does the performer know a wide range of tricks? 
Proficiency – skill and experience
•	
The performance is engaging and buskers are able to 
draw an audience.
•	
The performer is highly skilled in their art form.
•	
The performer retains complete control of every aspect 
of their performance.
•	
Safety is never a concern.
Uniqueness – unusual, special, one-of-a-kind
•	
The performer possesses a unique quality, subtle or 
dramatic, that gives them an interesting edge.
•	
The performer has an original repertoire that makes 
them unlike other performers.
Professionalism – effectiveness, skill, organisation 
and seriousness of manner
•	
The performer’s equipment is in good working order.
•	
Sound levels are within acceptable levels. 
(see designated sound levels pg. 22)
•	
The performer is punctual and prepared.
•	
The performer demonstrates an aptitude for 
communication and cooperation.
•	
The performer sets a high standard.
LEVEL TWO
REVIEW CRITERIA

=== page 17 ===
Melbourne Busking Handbook
15

=== page 18 ===
melbourne.vic.gov.au
16
PERMIT CONDITIONS, RIGHTS 
AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Special circumstances
At different times of the year Melbourne enjoys a variety 
of events and festivals featuring renowned local, interstate 
and overseas artists. During such times, busking permit 
conditions may be altered to incorporate a wider range of 
activities for brief periods of time. 
Access to site
An authorised council officer, any member of the Victoria 
Police, the Federal Police, Emergency Service personnel 
and any other authorised officer may require busking to 
stop or a busker to relocate to another busking site for the 
duration of any particular works. Utilities companies such 
as phone, gas, electricity and water may need to access a 
busking site at short notice to carry out repairs.
Public interaction and etiquette
Buskers are expected not to disturb others while busking. 
This includes incorporating unwilling members of the public 
into a performance, aggressive soliciting of donations, and 
mimicking or making fun of members of the public.
In the interest of self-regulation, if a busker is located 
directly outside a retailer or residential building and is 
breaching their permit, and/or causing a nuisance the 
busker should attempt to amicably resolve the issue with 
the complainant. 
If there is no mutually agreeable solution the busker should 
move on if requested to do so by the retailer or resident or 
contact a Local Laws Officer on 03 9658 9658 to mediate.
Unacceptable behaviour
Aggressive, abusive, offensive or hostile behaviour will not 
be tolerated under any circumstances. 
Buskers engaging in this behaviour may have their permits 
suspended and/or cancelled and/or the matter referred to 
Victoria Police. 
The City of Melbourne maintains the right to suspend or 
cancel permits indefinitely for inappropriate behaviour.

=== page 19 ===
Melbourne Busking Handbook
17
We want your busking experience to be positive 
Busking permits are issued on the condition 
that you agree to:
•	
Respect and cooperate with other buskers, permit 
holders, residents, retailers, City of Melbourne and 
other authorised officers and visitors to the city.
•	
Be responsible for all aspects of your performance 
including public safety and sound management.
•	
Follow the terms and conditions of the Melbourne 
Busking Handbook.
•	
Have the correct permit for your activity.
•	
Maintain your equipment in good order.
•	
Address any complaints raised about your busking 
activity and work with Council Officers to resolve 
any concerns.
We will support you by:
•	
Providing useful information to help you manage 
your busking performance including sound.
•	
Keeping you informed of any changes to busking 
in the City of Melbourne.
•	
Providing you with information about events and 
potential performance opportunities.
•	
Working with you to respond to complaints.
Don’t risk it! 
Your busking permit may be suspended or cancelled, 
if you don’t adhere to the permit conditions.

=== page 20 ===
melbourne.vic.gov.au
18
Safety, pedestrian 
access/audience management
and accessibility
To facilitate the provisions of the Disability Discrimination 
Act (DDA) the following points apply to your 
busking activity. 
Safety
•	
Buskers must work to ensure that, neither themselves 
nor their audience, pedestrians or the general public 
are put at risk at any time during their performance. 
Buskers must accept responsibility for any impact that 
their performance may have on other city services 
and activities.
Pedestrian access/audience management
•	
Buskers are responsible for managing their audience so 
that reasonable pedestrian access and public amenity is 
maintained at all times. 
•	
Buskers must publicly announce and direct crowds 
either before and/or during the performance to maintain 
essential access clearances. 
Accessibility
•	
Buskers should ensure that their performance does not 
block shop doorways, dining areas and cafes during 
business hours, residential doorways or fire escapes at 
any time, access to bus or tram stops. Disability access 
around a site must be maintained at all times. 
•	
Except in areas such as the Bourke Street Mall where 
street furniture is within a designated busking area, 
busking should not compromise the general public’s 
access to public seating or street infrastructure such 
as bicycle hoops or bins. 
Busking against building frontages*
•	
To enable unobstructed access and safety for people 
who have vision impairment, busking against building 
frontages is not permitted in the municipality’s main and 
intermediate streets. This means that you cannot perform 
with your back against a building or place any equipment 
against the building frontage. This also applies when 
it’s raining.
•	
Buskers must not perform within five metres of a road 
intersection including any pedestrian crossing or 
traffic signals.
Narrow streets and footpaths*  
•	
Some laneways or sections of laneways do not have 
the footpath space to accommodate busking without 
interfering with pedestrian access.
Please refer to the City of Melbourne website for information 
about these locations as well as locations that have been 
identified as unsuitable for busking. 
Cleanliness and property damage
Buskers must:
•	
Ensure that their use of the site does not pose a threat 
to public safety. 
•	
Ensure that the busking site is not stained with any 
material, chemical or other residue.
•	
Leave the busking site in the same condition that 
it was found.
•	
Ensure that public property is not damaged in the course 
of the performance.
Distance between 
busking performances
Set up at a reasonable distance from other performers so 
that crowding does not occur. 
Performers generating sound need to consider other 
buskers who may not use sound. Performers who generate 
sound, especially amplified, are expected to negotiate 
appropriate distances with silent or quieter buskers such 
as statue acts and magicians.
Sound performances in the general area, should be situated 
at least 30 metres away from another sound performance 
and buskers are expected to negotiate cooperatively with 
each other.
General area artists working on Southbank Promenade 
should be at least 30 metres away from circle act 
performances.
* There are several laneways and spaces in the city that are closed to vehicle traffic, have a suitable width and/or a defined route of travel where 
busking against building frontages can be permitted.

=== page 21 ===
Melbourne Busking Handbook
19
Time on Pitch - how long can I busk in one spot?
Buskers should only perform in the allocated locations 
within the allocated time frames for their permit type 
and are encouraged to take breaks.
General area 
Buskers are permitted to perform for a maximum of 
two hours per day at each location. Buskers must move 
to another busking location (at least 50 metres away) 
and not return to that location again that day.
Chalk artists or those artists who work on large 
canvases are permitted to remain in one location for 
up to eight hours.
Circle acts
A performance must not exceed sixty minutes in 
duration. Time on the pitch should also include 
pack up and cleaning of the site.
Premium permit
Depending on the location, premium permit holders will 
be required to perform in the allocated locations within 
the allocated timeframes:
- Bourke Street Mall
Bourke Street Mall buskers are permitted to perform 
for thirty minutes with a thirty minute break for the 
duration of the set as allocated at the Bourke Street 
Mall buskers’ meeting.
- Other premium busking locations
As new locations for premium permits are 
designated, these will be published on the City 
of Melbourne website.
Permit display
Buskers should clearly display their valid busking permit 
at all times during their performance and be in possession 
of their busking permit when setting up and packing down. 
This enables authorised City of Melbourne officers and 
members of the Victoria Police to check permit details, 
if necessary, without interrupting a performance. 
Busking permits can be attached to a microphone stand, 
amplifier, easel, or placed on the footpath in front of 
the performer. 
Performing
Buskers may not leave any CDs or other music playing 
when not performing. Buskers cannot play a CD instead of 
performing. Circle act buskers who use music while setting 
up their shows and gathering an audience are exempt. For 
buskers who have additional selling approval, the primary 
activity must be performance and not sales.

=== page 22 ===
melbourne.vic.gov.au
20

=== page 23 ===
Melbourne Busking Handbook
21
MANAGEMENT OF SOUND 
GENERATED BY BUSKING
Sound from busking in the public realm has the potential 
to disrupt business trading, affect workplace performance 
and detract from public amenity. Even though on-street 
sound from busking contributes to the vibrancy of the city, 
it can be the cause of great discomfort for others when 
it is excessive. 
Amplification is permitted while busking in the city in order 
to balance the needs of a performer to be clearly heard 
against the reasonable amenity expectations of passers-by 
or people living or working in proximity.
Amplification enables performers to:
•	
Save their voices from strain and damage.
•	
Amplify quieter instruments which are not easy to hear 
above ambient sound levels.
•	
Supply a backing track which provides rhythmic 
assistance, musical accompaniment or music backing for 
street theatre performances.
Amplification will only be permitted with battery powered 
devices. Mains powered amplification is strictly prohibited. 
Generator powered batteries are prohibited.
Repetition and lack of repertoire
No matter how enjoyable a performance or talented an 
entertainer, a repertoire of only a few songs can quickly 
become a source of nuisance for a captive audience 
who may not be able to move to another location for the 
duration of your performance. If you are in the same spot, 
playing the same songs every day, even your most ardent 
fan may soon be reaching for the earplugs. Try to vary your 
busking locations and set list as much as possible.
Responsibilities of buskers
•	
Buskers need to be aware of the sound level at which 
they are performing. To check sound levels, the busker 
or a person assisting should walk around the public area 
adjacent to their performance site, using the sound limits 
indicated in this handbook as a point of reference for 
what is an acceptable level. 
•	
Buskers should also consider that in order to stay within 
acceptable sound levels, the volume of their performance 
should be equivalent to a raised or stage voice. 
•	
Buskers need to consider the qualities of the sound 
projected into the public place. Characteristics such 
as distortion can be perceived as louder and cause 
additional annoyance and intrusion for others. 
•	
Inexpensive, poorly-maintained microphone and 
loudspeaker equipment tends to contribute to distortion. 
Distortion can also be caused when a microphone is 
placed too near to a person’s mouth. Distortion issues 
can often be resolved through simple actions such as 
equipment maintenance and proper microphone usage. 
Another common problem is placement of loudspeakers. 
When loudspeakers are faced towards smooth, reflective 
surfaces such as glass or concrete the sound becomes 
amplified and can cause additional annoyance to others.
•	
Speakers should not be placed so that the sound is 
projected directly into open shop fronts. 
•	
Some instruments may be naturally loud enough 
that they do not require amplification to be heard. 
Examples include some wind instruments and percussion 
instruments such as drums. It may be inappropriate 
to use a microphone and amplification for these 
instruments, as it can result in excessive sound levels, 
regardless of the equipment settings.
•	
Authorised officers can suggest actions to reduce noise 
levels and improve public amenity. Buskers must respond 
to the instructions of authorised officers regarding sound 
and public amenity. Buskers may be requested to cease 
their performance if they are not able to manage 
sound levels.

=== page 24 ===
melbourne.vic.gov.au
22
Designated sound levels
The limits have been set so that the sound level of busking 
is slightly greater than general ambient noises and loud 
enough to be clearly heard above background noise. 
Potential exists for some louder sounds such as tram bells, 
to interfere with busking activity, and these are considered 
reasonable impacts, given that the central city is not a 
dedicated performance space. 
Busking activity in the City of Melbourne should operate at 
a level so that the sound:
•	
Is not intrusive above background levels to the degree 
that a passer-by would have to strain their voice to be 
heard above the sound.
•	
Does not drown out other background noise when a 
person is more than 30 metres from the source of sound.
Sound from busking must be maintained in accordance with 
the designated sound levels listed below.
Permissible amplification times
Amplified busking in most areas is limited to the 
following times:
•	
8am to 10pm Sunday to Thursday.
•	
8am to 11pm Friday and Saturday.
•	
8am to 11pm on the eve of public holidays.
Amplified busking on Southbank Promenade between 
Evan Walker Bridge and Queens Bridge is limited to the 
following times:
•	
8am to 10pm Monday to Sunday.
Amplified busking in the chessboard area in front of 140 
Swanston Street is permitted from: 
•	
5.30pm to 10pm Monday to Thursday.
•	
5.30pm to 11pm Friday and Saturday.
•	
8am to 10pm on Sundays.
Acoustic busking 
Acoustic busking can reasonably continue outside the 
permissible times for amplification. However, as the central 
city is a capital city zone which houses many residents, 
buskers will need to take note of the location of hotels, 
motels and residential buildings before deciding to busk 
acoustically past the designated times for amplified 
busking. Please refer to the interactive map on the City of 
Melbourne website to check accommodation locations. 
Bagpipes, drums and other 
instruments or performances 
that are naturally loud 
without amplification
The above time limits apply to bagpipes, drums and other 
instruments or performances that are naturally loud 
without amplification.
Additional restrictions for locations and timings may 
apply to instruments identified as loud without the use of 
amplification. Advice and instructions will be provided on 
permit issue. 
Source
Busking - General area and circle act
Busking - Bourke Street Mall
1 metre sound level  81 dB LAeq 1 min
3 metre sound level 72 dB LAeq 1 min
6 metre sound level 66 dB LAeq 1 min
1 metre sound level  88 dB LAeq 1 min
3 metre sound level 79 dB LAeq 1 min
6 metre sound level 73 dB LAeq 1 min
An enthusiastic audience or an increase in another 
performer’s volume levels are not valid reasons for 
exceeding the designated sound levels.
Repeated excessive noise may result in the 
suspension and/or cancellation of a busking permit.

=== page 25 ===
Melbourne Busking Handbook
23
Non-amplified busking zones 
Non-amplified busking zones are designated 
for reasons of public safety or amenity. 
Any decision to remove amplification or reinstate 
amplification to an area must be considered in the 
context of the busking principles. A reduction in 
permitted sound levels or permissible amplification 
times will be considered before investigating the 
removal of amplification from the city streets. 
Except where designated in writing by the City of 
Melbourne, busking with amplification is strictly not 
permitted in the following areas:
•	
Outside Flinders Street Station.
•	
Outside Southern Cross Station.
•	
Southbank Promenade - between 
Princes Bridge and Evan Walker Bridge.
•	
Centre Place.
•	
Outside accommodation: hotels, motels 
and residential buildings. 
Non-amplified busking zones may change from time 
to time and differ from this list. 
Please refer to the City of Melbourne website or phone 
03 9658 9658 for up-to-date non-amplified busking 
zone information.

=== page 26 ===
melbourne.vic.gov.au
24

=== page 27 ===
Melbourne Busking Handbook
25
PERFORMANCE
LOCATIONS
Busking is permitted in public places where it is able to 
meet the criteria outlined in the handbook. 
Sites may move, be temporarily unavailable or permanently 
removed at the City of Melbourne’s discretion. Buskers must 
follow the direction of City of Melbourne authorised officers 
if any busking site becomes unavailable either temporarily 
or permanently.
Buskers can keep up to date with changes to availability of 
busking sites by checking the City of Melbourne website 
for updates.
Premium permit and circle act permit holders are limited to 
the designated sites for those permit types. Other permit 
holders may not perform in sites designated for premium 
permit holders and circle act permit holders have priority 
over designated circle act pitches.
Premium permit locations
Performance locations in the Bourke Street Mall
There are six busking sites in the Bourke Street 
Mall. Currently five busking sites are allocated for 
musical performances, one site is allocated for 
non-musical performances such as living statue 
performances. The five busking sites where musical 
performances are permitted are in front 
of the following retail areas:
1. 350 Bourke Street, Melbourne, 3000
2. 327 Bourke Street, Melbourne, 3000
3. 283–297 Bourke Street, Melbourne, 3000
4. 271–281 Bourke Street, Melbourne, 3000
5. 310 Bourke Street, Melbourne, 3000
6. 284-292 Bourke Street, Melbourne, 3000 
(non-musical performance site)
Note – As new locations for premium permits 
are designated, these will be published on the 
City of Melbourne website.
Performance locations for circle acts
Locations generally permitted for circle act busking:
•	
Southbank Promenade 
- In front of 12 Riverside Quay 
  (currently know as Esso House)
- Queensbridge Square
•	
Docklands:
- Waterfront City Docklands
- New Quay Docklands
- Victoria Harbour Docklands
•	
Locations permitted subject to availability 
and events:
- Birrarung Marr
Some permits may be issued for small shows 
and walk by acts for locations other than those 
listed above. These locations will be listed on the 
individual permits. Circle act performers may also 
recommend suitable locations to be approved by 
the Team Leader Street Trading after consultation 
with the relevant areas of the City of Melbourne. 
Please refer to the City of Melbourne website 
or phone 03 9658 9658 for busking location 
information.

=== page 28 ===
melbourne.vic.gov.au
26
Busking ’No-go zones’ are designated for reasons of public 
safety or amenity. 
Any decision to designate an area a ‘No-go zone’ or 
reinstate a ‘No-go zone’ to a permitted busking area must 
be considered in the context of the busking principles. 
Any decision to remove busking from a public place to 
an area must be considered in the context of the busking 
principles. A reduction in permitted sound levels or 
permissible amplification times will be considered before 
investigating the removal of permitted busking locations 
from the city streets.
Unless otherwise advised in writing by the City of 
Melbourne, the following locations are designated ‘No-go 
zones’ for City of Melbourne busking permit holders:
•	
Within five metres of any intersection, pedestrian 
crossing, traffic signal or public telephone booth unless 
otherwise designated.
•	
Directly in front of ticket barriers, entrances or steps at 
train stations.
•	
Underneath designated super tram stop shelters as this 
prevents easy access to and from trams at designated 
tram stops.
•	
Swanston Street: 
- between Flinders Street and Flinders Lane
  both east and west sides
- directly in front of the Town Hall on the
  eastern side of Swanston Street, between
  Collins Street and Little Collins Street.
•	
The intersection of Bourke Street Mall and Swanston 
Street, on the west side.
•	
Parks and gardens excluding Birrarung Marr.
•	
Outside Parliament House.
•	
Outside or adjacent to 
- hospitals
- memorial sites (e.g. Shrine of Remembrance, 
  Bali Memorial)
- places of worship when services are taking place. 
Busking is not permitted at any time in residential zones 
as designated in the Melbourne Planning Scheme. These 
areas include the General Residential, Residential Growth 
and Neighbourhood Residential Zones of North Melbourne, 
West Melbourne, Kensington, Flemington, South Yarra 
and Parkville. Residential zones are those areas that are 
primarily for residential purposes. 
The CBD and Southbank are located in the Capital City 
Zone which incorporates residential, business and other 
uses including street activity. Docklands is in the Docklands 
Zone. Both the Capital City Zone and Docklands Zone are 
mixed use areas where busking is permitted. 
No-go zones may change from time to time and differ 
from this list. 
Please refer to the City of Melbourne website or
phone 03 9658 9658 for up-to-date busking No-go zone 
information.
Locations not covered by the City 
of Melbourne busking permits
•	
Federation Square. 
•	
Queen Victoria Market. 
•	
Yarra Promenade at the Crown Entertainment Complex 
between Spencer Street and Queensbridge Street. 
•	
Melbourne Convention and Exhibition Centre, including 
South Wharf Promenade. 
•	
Privately owned laneways and streets.
•	
Privately managed shopping arcades.  
•	
Train stations. 
These locations are subject to change. Please refer to the 
City of Melbourne website or phone 03 9658 9658 for up-
to-date busking location information.
Major events and other 
approved activities 
The City of Melbourne issues permits for many other 
activities in the public place such as events, promotions, 
festivals, outdoor cafes, markets, street trading, food trucks, 
handbills and fundraising.
Specific restrictions or blanket prohibition on busking may 
be imposed during planned major events such as New 
Year’s Eve, White Night, Australia Day, Anzac Day, Moomba 
or other public holidays or events.
Restrictions may apply during Total Fire Ban days and other 
extreme weather events. 
Any busking site may move or become temporarily 
unavailable due to an organised special event or other 
permitted activity. Buskers must follow the direction of 
City of Melbourne authorised officers if any busking site 
becomes unavailable. Every effort will be given to providing 
alternative locations.
In the case of an organised event such as a market, 
promotion or festival, performers should not attempt to 
associate themselves with that event unless otherwise 
advised or invited by the event organiser.
Please refer to the City of Melbourne website or phone
03 9658 9658 for up-to-date busking location information.
BUSKING
NO-GO ZONES

=== page 29 ===
Melbourne Busking Handbook
27
MAKING MONEY 
FROM BUSKING
Receiving tips and selling
Buskers may give audiences an opportunity to provide 
voluntary donations or tips by placing an instrument 
case or container on their busking pitch. Buskers must 
not solicit funds in a way that is overtly offensive to 
members of the public. The audience is under no 
obligation to pay for a performance. 
Aggressive soliciting, invasive spruiking, touting, 
haggling and bartering are not permitted. 
Buskers are permitted to tell an audience about 
upcoming live performances.
Selling guidelines
Unless indicated on the busking permit, buskers 
must not offer goods or services for sale, display, 
demonstrate or advertise goods for sale or associate 
themselves with such advertising in conjunction with 
their performance.
For buskers wishing to sell in conjunction with their 
busking performance, unless otherwise indicated on the 
permit the following conditions apply:
•	
Buskers may only sell if they have paid any relevant 
selling fees and have that selling permission 
recorded on their permit.
•	
A fee of $100 per year will apply for those buskers 
wishing to sell their original work in conjunction with 
their busking performance.
•	
Sale items are limited to original works produced or 
created by the busker (e.g. CDs, DVDs, paintings and 
drawings).
•	
Goods such as t-shirts, stickers, tickets and books 
are not permitted for sale with a busking permit. 
•	
Prints of artworks or drawings are not permitted 
unless approved in writing by the City of Melbourne.
•	
Buskers engaged in a musical performance are 
permitted to display a maximum of 20 pre-recorded 
CDs/DVDs for sale.
•	
Buskers are not permitted to play pre-recorded 
music in the busking location in lieu of a busking 
performance or while taking a break from busking.
•	
Buskers must have clearly displayed prices.
•	
A small sign (approximately A4 sized) located on the 
busking site may alert the public to this opportunity.
Business cards which can be collected by the public 
from your instrument case or donations container are 
permitted and do not require a selling fee to be paid.

=== page 30 ===
melbourne.vic.gov.au
28
COMPLAINTS, DISPUTE
RESOLUTION AND COMPLIANCE
Dispute resolution and compliance
The City of Melbourne has a responsibility to monitor 
busking activities in the public place, including ensuring 
that permit conditions are consistently maintained.
In the interests of creating and maintaining a lively, 
safe and entertaining community environment, the City 
of Melbourne encourages self-regulation of busking 
activities. Buskers are expected to work co-operatively 
and take responsibility for managing performance 
spaces and to solve disputes and complaints at a 
local level.
Where it is evident that this is not the case, the City 
of Melbourne undertakes an educational approach by 
initiating discussions with permit holders to explain the 
reasons behind permit specifications. This method of 
open communication seeks to resolve issues as quickly 
and amicably as possible.
Following a complaint or a report of a breach of permit 
conditions or any requirements under the handbook, 
an authorised City of Melbourne representative will visit 
the site and seek rectification if a breach is identified. 
Action is initiated according to the impact the breach is 
having on the safety, access and amenity of the area.
Problem solving 
and managing complaints
Buskers, retailers and residents are encouraged to resolve 
issues amicably with the aim to enable the busking activity 
to continue if buskers are working within the conditions of 
the handbook. 
In the interest of self-regulation, if a busker is located 
directly outside a retailer or residential building and is 
breaching their permit, and/or causing a nuisance 
(for example, loud or intrusive, repetitive, or causing other 
obstruction) all parties must attempt to resolve the 
issue amicably.
If there is no mutually agreeable solution the busker should 
move on if requested to do so by the retailer or resident or 
contact a Local Laws Officer on 03 9658 9658 to mediate. 

=== page 31 ===
Melbourne Busking Handbook
29
Cessation and/or relocation
If after all reasonable steps have been taken to rectify a 
complaint authorised officers of the City of Melbourne or 
any member of the Victoria Police may direct that a busker 
cease busking or relocate to another site. Relocation and/
or cessation will occur if the officer is of the opinion that the 
performance is: 
•	
Loud or intrusive.
•	
Excessively repetitive.
•	
Causing public inconvenience or nuisance.
•	
Offensive, inappropriate, dangerous in manner or causing 
detriment to the amenity of the area.
•	
Likely to cause harm to the public or property.
•	
Causing an extended obstruction to pedestrians or 
vehicular traffic or entrances to shops/buildings.
•	
Interfering in any way with an approved event or activity 
without permission.
•	
Selling or offering for sale any articles or commodity 
without authorisation.
•	
In breach of the conditions of the permit.
The busker must immediately comply with such a request 
which may also result in suspension or cancellation of 
the permit.
Breach of permit conditions, 
suspension or cancellation of 
permit
Any breach of permit conditions will be dealt with in 
accordance with the enforcement provisions of the 
Activities Local Law 2009.
Wherever possible, buskers will be educated about breaches 
of the Activities Local Law before any further action is taken.
Busking enforcement will involve officers undertaking one 
or more of the following actions:
•	
Education and/or the issuing of a verbal warning.
•	
Issue a written warning.
•	
Issue an infringement notice. 
•	
Suspension or cancellation of permit.
Busking without a permit will also be dealt with in 
accordance with the enforcement provisions of the 
Activities Local Law 2009.
Penalties
The prescribed penalty for busking without a permit is $500 
and $100 for a breach of busking permit under the Activities 
Local Law 2009. The prescribed penalty for failing to 
comply with a notice to comply is $1000.
Cancellation of a permit by 
permit holder
The permit holder may request the cancellation of a permit 
at any time. The intention to cancel must be provided in 
writing to City of Melbourne along with the return of the 
permit. No refund of permit fees paid will be made.
Infringement review process
By law, you are entitled to request only one review 
of a fine issued. For information on requesting an 
infringement review and special circumstances, visit 
www.melbourne.vic.gov.au/contestfine .
For further information on busking in Melbourne, please 
visit www.melbourne.vic.gov.au/busking, call on
03 9658 9658 or email busking@melbourne.vic.gov.au .

=== page 32 ===
melbourne.vic.gov.au
