=== page 1 ===
 
Busking Permit summary and Conditions 
Permit summary 
A busking permit approves busking activity in public spaces solely within the City of Melbourne. 
As a permit holder, your key responsibilities are to:  
 
comply with any direction given by Authorised Officers of Council or Victoria Police 
 
observe maximum sound levels (measured at 3 m for 1 min): 
79 dB LAeq in Bourke Street Mall, 72 dB LAeq in all other busking areas 
 
observe performance durations and location limits: 
General area 2 hrs move on, Premium (Bourke Street Mall) 30 min on 30 min break (for day), Circle 
act 60 min move on, Pavement art and street entertainment 4 hrs move on 
 
not busk or place equipment against building frontages in main and intermediate streets 
 
keep out of restricted areas including train station entrances and steps, Swanston Street (Flinders 
Street to Flinders Lane) and some super tram stop shelters 
 
limit the use of amplification to approved areas and designated times:  
8am-10pm Sun to Thu, 8am-11pm Fri to Sat, 8am-11pm on the eve of a public holiday. 
This summary is subject to any requirements or conditions set out during the application process and subject 
to the full conditions set out in the permit. We encourage you to take a few moments to read the full 
conditions, as these will impact the conduct of your activities and help you avoid a fine, delays or 
cancellation of the permit. 
You can visit our website for more information on busking permits1. 
                                                     
1 melbourne.vic.gov.au/arts-and-culture/film-music-busking/street-entertainment-busking/busking-permits/Pages/busking-
permits.aspx 

=== page 2 ===
Permit Conditions 
In this permit: 
“we”, “us”, “our” and “Council” refers to Melbourne City Council, “you” and “your” refers to the permit holder. 
1. Compliance 
a. You must comply with Council’s Local Laws2, our Street Activity Policy3, our Melbourne Busking 
Handbook4 and all conditions of this permit. 
2. Specific conditions 
a. Location 
i. You must observe designated sites and restricted areas5 in accordance with your permit. 
ii. You must not obstruct pedestrian flow or allow it to be obstructed by your audience.  
iii. Locations must not be damaged or stained with any material, chemical or residue. 
b. Duration 
i. General area performances are limited to 2 hours per location per day. After 2 hours you must 
move to another location (min. 50 m away) and not return to the previous location that day. 
ii. Premium performances in Bourke Street Mall are limited to 30 min with a 30 min break for the 
duration of the day as allocated in the Bourke Street Mall buskers meeting (except in non-amplified 
locations). 
iii. Circle act performances are limited to 60 minutes (including set up, pack up and cleaning of 
location). 
iv. Pavement artists may remain in one location for up to 4 hours, then must move to another location 
(min. 50 m away). Chalk artists working on large canvases may remain in one location for up to 
8 hours. 
v. Street entertainment is limited to 4 hours per location per day, inclusive of set-up and wind-down. 
After 4 hours you must move to another location (min. 50 m away) and not return to the previous 
location that day. 
c. Noise must not exceed the designated sound levels for busking activity6. 
i. Amplified busking in approved areas is limited to 8am to 10pm Sunday to Thursday, 8am to 11pm 
Friday to Saturday and on the eve of gazetted public holidays (exclusions apply). 
d. Buskers under 16 years of age must have parental or legal guardian consent to apply for a permit and 
have parental or legal guardian supervision at all times while performing.  
e. Approved sale items are limited to original works produced or created by you as part of your 
performance. 
f. Circle act performers must safely manage any crowd they draw and are responsible for maintaining 
public safety and amenity at all times during performances. 
3. General conditions 
a. Where required by us, you must maintain a comprehensive public liability insurance policy meeting our 
requirements7 for the duration of this permit. 
b. This permit is not transferable. It must be held on site and be produced on request by an authorised 
officer of Council or member of Victoria Police. You must comply promptly with any notices and 
instructions. 
c. Any variation required to a permit must be submitted to and approved by us in writing prior to any 
change or variation to activities. 
d. This permit does not exempt you from compliance with our Local Laws. 
e. All activities under this permit must be undertaken during the hours stated herein. 
                                                     
2 melbourne.vic.gov.au/about-council/governance-transparency/acts-local-laws/Pages/local-laws-2019.aspx 
3 melbourne.vic.gov.au/business/permits-and-approvals/street-trading/Pages/street-activity-policy-2011.aspx 
4 melbourne.vic.gov.au/arts-and-culture/film-music-busking/street-entertainment-busking/Pages/melbourne-busking-
handbook.aspx 
5 melbourne.vic.gov.au/arts-and-culture/film-music-busking/street-entertainment-busking/Pages/busking-locations.aspx 
6 melbourne.vic.gov.au/arts-and-culture/film-music-busking/street-entertainment-busking/Pages/sound-
management.aspx 
7 melbourne.vic.gov.au/about-council/governance-transparency/policies-protocols/Pages/public-liability-insurance.aspx 

=== page 3 ===
f. You are responsible for ensuring all permit details are correct as no refunds will be considered after 
the date of permit issue, unless required by law. 
g. We reserve the right to amend, suspend or cancel this permit at any time. 
 
