
Enforcement of road rules in Victoria | RACV
We've recently reviewed and updated our Privacy Charter, which describes how we use cookies and other technologies to understand and improve your browsing experience. By using our site, you agree to us collecting this information and to our 
Privacy Charter
.
Accept
Skip to main content
About RACV
Retail stores
Fuel prices
Help & support
Contact
Log in
Search RACV
Insurance
Cars & transport
Home
Travel & experiences
Membership
News & lifestyle
Log in
Penalties, fines and infringements
What happens if you break a road rule? Learn about the enforcement of road rules in Victoria.
Thank you for contacting us
Your reference number is
We'll contact you within 72 hours and may ask for this reference number.
Understanding penalties, fines and infringements
Penalties for breaking road rules vary depending on the severity of the offence. In Victoria, there are a variety of penalties that can be applied, including fines, vehicle impoundment, attracting demerit points, licence suspension or in extreme cases, being taken to court.
Useful links
RACV Drive School
Road rules
Safe driving tips
In this section
Demerit points
Types of fines and infringements
Contesting a fine
Demerit points
How do demerit points work?
A demerit point is a penalty point applied to your driving record when you commit a driving offence in Australia. You’re usually notified of this via a Traffic Infringement Notice.
All drivers start off with zero demerit points.
Demerit points for driving offences range from 1-10 points and apply from the date the offence was made.
Demerit points are valid for three years from the date of the offence (although sometimes older points can be counted due to delayed court processes).
If you’re sent an infringement notice but weren’t driving at the time of the offence, you can nominate who was driving at the time so that you’re not penalised.
Find out more about 
demerit points
 and the 
number of demerit points for each offence
 from VicRoads.
Types of fines and infringements
Road safety cameras
Cameras can detect speeding, running a red light or driving an unregistered vehicle. If you’re caught, you can receive a fine. RACV believes overt and covert cameras play an important role in keeping our roads safe, but they should only be in problem areas or sites where safety has the potential to be an issue.
Traffic cameras and fines are all about revenue raising, aren’t they?
In 2005, RACV successfully advocated that all revenue raised from traffic safety cameras and on-the-spot speeding fines should be channelled back into roads to make the system more transparent. Since July 2005 all money from traffic cameras and speeding fines has been dedicated to funding road safety improvements. 
What's the role of the Road Safety Camera Commissioner?
The Road Safety Camera Commissioner checks the accuracy of speed cameras and undertakes investigations relating to the integrity, accuracy and efficiency of the camera system. The Commissioner can't investigate and resolve individual complaints but does monitor complaints to see if there is a pattern that might reveal problems with the camera system.
RACV recommends drivers carefully consider the information on the 
Commissioner’s website
 when making a complaint about a fine.
What are the ‘rules’ for the placement of mobile speed cameras?
The locations of mobile speed cameras are approved by Victoria Police. The approved locations for mobile speed cameras are also available on the 
Cameras Save Lives website
.
What is the tolerance on speed cameras?
The Road Safety (General) Regulations 2009 includes a tolerance for speeding offences. This means that an infringement notice is issued for less than the speed a person was detected to be travelling at.
This tolerance deducts two km/hr from a vehicle's detected speed for fixed digital safety cameras. For mobile cameras, a tolerance of three km/hr or three per cent for speeds over 100km/hr is deducted.
Police can also apply an additional tolerance at their discretion.
How do red-light cameras work?
A red-light camera will only activate after the traffic signal turns red. A red-light camera takes two photos to verify that an infringement has occurred:
The first photo is taken when a vehicle crosses the stop line and enters the detector loop area (generally located between the stop line and pedestrian crossing line) after the lights change to red; and
The second photo is taken when the vehicle continues through the intersection against the red light by exiting the detector loop area.
Some intersections have combined speed and red-light (intersection) cameras. Because of this, a camera may flash on a green light if a driver is speeding or the camera is being tested. If a driver also speeds through a red light, two infringements will be issued. 
If you believe a camera is flashing incorrectly, you can report it through the Cameras Save Lives website.
Visit the Victorian Government website for more information on 
red-light camera operation
 or watch the Victorian Department of Justice 
video
.
Public transport
Caught travelling without a valid Myki ticket? This is one of the most common public transport offences. Other offences include, but aren’t limited to, behaving violently, trespassing, littering on a vehicle and smoking in a vehicle.
Authorised Officers are on the look out for this kind of behaviour and when they catch someone doing the wrong thing, they send a report to the Department of Economic Development, Jobs, Transport and Resources (DEDJTR). Once the report has been received and reviewed, DEDJTR issue a fine, warning, court summons or make the call that no further action needs to be taken. Authorised Officers can’t give on-the-spot fines.
RACV suggests visiting 
Transport Victoria
 for more information on:
Types of public transport fines
Requesting a review
How to pay a fine
Private car parks
It’s important to know things like time limits, payment structures and costs and whether you need to display a parking ticket prior to parking your vehicle in a private car park to avoid potential infringements.
Private car park operators can’t issue a fine or infringement, but they can issue a ‘breach of contract’ notice requesting payment for an alleged failure to obey the terms and conditions of the car park.
For more information on parking payment notices in private car parks, visit 
Consumer Affairs Victoria
.
Vehicle impoundment
Legislation allows authorities to impound, immobilise or forfeit a vehicle that has been used for a high-risk/dangerous driving offence or hoon driving. The vehicle doesn’t have to belong to the offender for it to be impounded or immobilised.
To report hoon driving call the Crime Stoppers Hoon Hotline on 
1800 333 000
 or visit 
Crime Stoppers
 online. If it’s an emergency, contact 000.
For more information visit VicRoads or see the Road Safety Amendment (Hoon Driving) Act 2010 and the Road Safety Act 1986 on the 
Victorian Legislation website
 (search under Victorian Law Today).
Contesting a fine
How do I contest a fine?
Penalties for breaking road rules exist to keep us all safe on our day-to-day travels, but sometimes people may feel they’ve been wrongly fined or penalised. In these circumstances, it may be worth investigating your options to determine whether you can challenge the fine or apply for a review.
Your options may include:
Reviewing the photo of your traffic offence at 
Fines Victoria
Applying for an 
Official warning
 with Victoria Police
Making a complaint or providing feedback about a fine through the 
Road Safety Commissioner
Seeking legal assistance (RACV is not able to provide legal advice or assistance)
For more information, read the  Victorian Road Safety Road Rules 2017.
Refresh your knowledge of the Victorian road rules
Find out more
The summaries RACV provide on Victorian road rules are based on the Victorian Road Safety Road Rules 2017. We make sure to reference the exact rule where possible. When reading, keep in mind that we’re providing general information, not legal advice. If you’re looking for specific questions on any legal matter, consult with a lawyer for help.
Insurance
Car insurance
Home insurance
Travel insurance
Business insurance
Motorcycle insurance
Caravan insurance
Boat insurance
Make or track a claim
Cars & transport
Roadside assistance
Car and vehicle loans
Research and compare cars
Drive School
Vehicle maintenance
Electric vehicles
Bikes and other transport
Road safety and rules
Home
Emergency trades
Home repairs and maintenance
Buying and selling a house
Home security
Home insurance
Solar
Travel & experiences
RACV Resorts
Travel insurance
Holidays
Offers and deals
Things to do 
Holiday planning
Getting around
Event planning
Travel agency locations
Membership
Manage your account
Member benefits and deals
About membership
RACV Club
Help and support
About us
Corporate Governance
Our leadership
Newsroom
Careers
Job list
Graduate program
RACV Club
RACV Resorts
Retail stores
Careers
About RACV
Privacy Charter
Cyber security
Legal
Download the RACV App
© 2026 Royal Automobile Club of Victoria (RACV) Limited. All rights reserved.
