=====PAGE 1=====
INTERNATIONAL
OIML R 91
RECOMMENDATION
Edition 1990 (E)
Radar equipment for the measurement of the speed
of vehicles
Cinémomètres radar pour la mesure de la vitesse des véhicules
Edition 1990 (E)

=====PAGE 2=====
2
ORGANISATION INTERNATIONALE
DE MÉTROLOGIE LÉGALE
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION
OF LEGAL METROLOGY
Foreword
The International Organization of Legal Metrology
(OIML) 
is 
a 
worldwide, 
intergovernmental
organization whose primary aim is to harmonize the
regulations and metrological controls applied by the
national 
metrological 
services, 
or 
related
organizations, of its Member States.
The two main categories of OIML publications are:
•
International Recommendations (OIML R),
which are model regulations that establish the
metrological characteristics required of certain
measuring instruments and which specify methods
and equipment for checking their conformity; the
OIML Member States shall implement these
Recommendations to the greatest possible extent;
•
International Documents (OIML D), which are
informative in nature and intended to improve the
work of the metrological services.
OIML Draft Recommendations and Documents are
developed by technical committees or subcommittees
which are formed by the Member States. Certain
international and regional institutions also participate
on a consultation basis.
Cooperative agreements are established between
OIML and certain institutions, such as ISO and IEC,
with 
the 
objective 
of 
avoiding 
contradictory
requirements; consequently, manufacturers and users
of measuring instruments, test laboratories, etc. may
apply simultaneously OIML publications and those of
other institutions.
International Recommendations and International
Documents are published in French (F) and English
(E) and are subject to periodic revision.
This publication – reference OIML R 91 (E), edition
1990 – which is under the responsibility of TC 7/SC 4
Measuring 
instruments 
for 
road 
traffic, 
was
sanctionned by the International Conference of Legal
Metrology in 1988.
OIML publications may be obtained from the
Organization’s headquarters:
Bureau International de Métrologie Légale
11, rue Turgot - 75009 Paris - France
Telephone:
33 (0)1 48 78 12 82 and 42 85 27 11
Fax:
33 (0)1 42 82 17 27
E-mail:
biml@oiml.org
Internet:
www.oiml.org

=====PAGE 3=====
3
RADAR EQUIPMENT
for the MEASUREMENT of the SPEED of VEHICLES
1  Scope
This Recommendation is applicable to microwave Doppler radar equipment for the measurement of
traffic speed on roads, hereafter, in short, "radar". The Recommendation states the conditions that the
radar must satisfy when the results of measurement are to be used in legal proceedings. The legal
interpretation of the results of measurements, the choice of radar types and the conditions under which
these instruments may be applied are left to national regulations.
2  Rules of correct operation
2.1  Handbook (see point 4)
Radars shall be installed and used in accordance with the instructions of a handbook issued by the
manufacturer and approved with the instrument, at the time of pattern approval.
2.2  Certainty of vehicle identification
The construction of the radar, including the internal logic of the measurement process, shall ensure
that, when the instrument is used in accordance with the handbook, an indicated speed cannot be
attributed to the wrong vehicule even where vehicles are passing or overtaking, or when the radar is
mounted on a moving vehicle.
The radar shall have a direction discriminator. However, because of its limited effect and stability, a
direction discriminator (single sideband device) does not offer a complete solution; additional means
shall be used. Where there is no other solution the radar shall invalidate its own result when two
vehicules with different speeds pass simultaneously through the radiation beam.
2.3  Aiming device
The angle of incidence of the beam shall be controllable by means of an aiming device so that relative
errors of measurement attributable to misalignment are not greater than ± 0.5 %. The angle shall be
stable. The aiming device may be omitted if the radar is to be used with a beam that is practically parallel
to the direction of traffic movement (incidence angles not exceeding 10°). The handbook shall give
details for positionning and adjustment, for all foreseeable installations (roadside, bridges, patrol cars,
prepared semipermanent sites, etc).
2.4  Radiation pattern of antenna
The approval of a given angle of incidence is left to national regulations. For beam axes not parallel to
the direction of traffic movement, angles of 15° to 30° are recommended.
When the radar is installed and used in accordance with the handbook, no measurement shall be
possible in those parts of the antenna lobe where an incorrect angle of incidence may result in relative
measurement errors greater than ± 2 %. Errors resulting from a tilting of the radar in relation to the
surface of the road shall also be considered.

=====PAGE 4=====
4
Note: This requirement may be satisfied by signal processing or by special shaping of the radiation
pattern. (For example, at an angle of incidence of 22°, an attenuation of any side lobe to − 15 dB,
or − 30 dB after reflexion, together with a total main-lobe width of less than 12° at − 10 dB, may
give satisfactory results).
The emitted power and the receiver sensitivity shall be matched in such a way that, in normal
operation, measurements accross more than two lanes (i.e. from the third lane) occur rarely. If in special
situations longer ranges must be activated, the fact shall be stated in writing near the indicating device
and on any records produced.
2.5  Time span for indication
If it is possible to use the radar without a suitable recording system (see point 2.6), the visual
indication of speed shall remain visible and shall inhibit any further measurement until it is freed by a
positive action. No event or action during this time may influence the result or have any effect on
subsequent measurements. These requirements need not apply to results below a given speed limit.
If the indication is of the analog type, it may not drift by more than 1 km/h in 5 minutes.
2.6  Recording devices
If the radar records the results of measurement, the record shall indicate the date and time of the
measurement, the measured speed and the vehicle's direction of travel. It shall be possible to discover
from the record the sensitivity setting of the radar (see point 2.4). If the identity of the vehicle is not made
recognizable by a photograph, records shall provide for its immediate identification in writing. The fact
that checks as stated in point 2.9 have been performed shall be evident from the records. The
requirements of point 2.2 shall be fulfilled.
If a camera is used, the correct relationship between the direction of radiation and that of the optical
axis of the camera shall be ensured by positive mechanical links or by the operations described in the
handbook by which the correct aiming of the system is verified from pictures.
2.7  Automatic and autonomous radar
Radars designed for operation under circumstances where it is not possible for an officer to verify
continuously their satisfactory performance shall provide a level of confidence "near to certainty" that the
error of each transmitted result shall be within the permissible limits. The manufacturer shall explain in
the handbook the measures he has taken to satisfy that condition.
The level of confidence shall take account of uncertainties of measurement, as well as a possible single
failure in the whole instrument. It shall be confirmed by the approval authority. If estimated by statistical
methods, it shall be at least 99.8 % (see also point 7.3).
Note:
The permanent automatic checking of the instrument's essential operations is required in point
3.4.2 of this Recommendation. Furthermore, with such unattended operation it is strongly advised
that redundant measurement techniques such as, for example, taking two pictures of the vehicle
separated by a specified time interval be used.

=====PAGE 5=====
5
2.8  Automatic exclusion of inaccurate results when the power voltage varies
Speed indications shall be inhibited when the power voltage varies beyond limits at which the
allowable errors may be surpassed.
2.9  Overall function test device
The radar shall incorporate some means of simulating a measurement that is independent of the
measuring circuits, and by which, at switch-on and additionally at the operator's will, the instrument is
checked overall. Such means shall make evident at least every nonintermittent failure of the low-
frequency and result-handling circuits, including circuits necessary to satisfy point 3.4.2 and including the
functioning and accuracy of indication. Records shall confirm that these tests have been performed.
These requirements need not apply if undetected intermittent or permanent failures can be excluded
(see point 3.4.2).
Notes: 1) For discontinuous (digital) signal handling channels, point 3.4.2.1 prescribes protective
measures sufficient to ensure correct operation.
2) Analog channels may be checked by, for example, simulated Doppler signals injected near the
output of the demodulator stage, or by a device modulating the microwave signal. Such means
to verify, among other things, that the upper and lower sensitivity limits are correct, may be
omitted if pattern approval tests show that variations of those limits are detected in another
way or cannot influence measurement results (see point 3.4.2.2.2) and that the signal is
reliably transformed into a speed indication.
3  Construction
3.1  Indicators and speed range
In radars useable without data recording, the indicators shall be readable by two operators
simultaneously in lighting conditions corresponding to the conditions of use for which the instrument is
suitable according to the handbook.
The speed range shall include at least the range (30 km/h, 150 km/h).
3.2  Mechanical stength
The radar shall be well and solidly built. The materials shall be chosen to ensure sufficient strength and
stability.
3.3  Resistance to extremes of climate
3.3.1  When out of service, radars shall be capable of withstanding ambient temperatures of − 25 °C to
+ 70 °C.
The manufacturer shall indicate the ambient temperature limits between which the radar will operate
with errors within the permitted limits. When these temperature limits are passed, radars designed for
unattended operation shall automatically go out of service. The range shall include at least the range
(0 °C, + 50 °C) (see point 7.1.1).
3.3.2  The radar shall be insensitive to relative humidity of the ambient air, both under static conditions of
storage and in service as described in point 3.3.1. (For insensitivity to condensation, see Annex, point
A.2.b).

=====PAGE 6=====
6
3.3.3  The parts of the radar that are exposed to the weather shall be dust proof and splash proof when all
accessories are fixed.
3.4  Reliability of electronic and logical components
3.4.1  Reaction to disturbance
Radars shall undergo tests showing their reactions to:
- power line variations,
- electrical bursts on the power line,
- external electromagnetic fields.
The relevant tests, severities and criteria for acceptance shall be as stipulated in the Annex to this
Recommendation.
3.4.2  Protection against electronic failure
3.4.2.1  Discontinuous (digital) signals
3.4.2.1.1  Results conveyed by digital signals (transfer operations, logic operations, storage, indications,
etc.) shall be made secure by additional logic-checking operations, individually (step by step) or
collectively (over all). Any discrepancy shall block the measurement in process.
3.4.2.1.2 Elements and components used in such operations (program memories, transfer memories,
processors, cabling, indicators, etc.) shall be implicitely checked at least every time the equipment is
switched on, by special checking operations, unless they are checked automatically by the logical
measures mentioned in point 3.4.2.1.1.
Errors of function that may be made evident as logical signals shall inhibit further measurement.
Others (e.g. indicator errors) shall be clearly indicated and the handbook shall explain the measures to be
taken.
3.4.2.1.3  Instructions (programs) and permanently stored data (e.g. scale factors, decision criteria, etc.) shall
be checked at least every time the instrument is switched on, by methods that show that they are
complete.
Note:
Methods applicable to digital signals (point 3.4.2.1) were surveyed in OIML Recommendation
R 74, "Electronic weighing instruments". That text makes (in a slightly different order) the
following provisions:
A.
All relevant measurement data shall be checked for correct value whenever they are stored
internally or transmitted to peripherals via an interface, by such means as: parity bit, check
sum, double storage, or handshake-routine with retransmission.
B.
Upon switch-on (in the case of instruments permanently connected to the mains: at switch-
on of indication), a special procedure shall be performed which shows all relevant signs of
the indicator in their active and non-active state sufficiently long to be checked by the
operator.
C.
Upon switch-on (in the case of instruments permanently connected to the mains: at switch-
on of indication), all data storage components shall be checked automatically to verify that:
C.1. all procedures of internal transfer and storage of data relevant to the measurement result are
performed correctly, by such means as:
-
write-read routines,
-
conversion and reconversion of codes,

=====PAGE 7=====
7
-
use of "safe coding" (check sum, parity bit),
-
double storage,
C.2. the values of all permanently memorized instructions and data are correct, by such means as:
-
summing of all instruction and data codes and comparing the sum with a fixed value,
-
line and column parity bits (LRC and VRC according to ISO 1155, October 1973),
The use of:
- cyclic redundancy check (CRC 16, ISO 2111, June 1971),
- double storage of data, both in same code,
- double storage of data, second in inverse or shifted coding,
- storage of data in "safe coding", for example protected by check sum, line and column
parity bits,
when verified by the type approval tests, is considered as satisfying C.2.
The use of parity bit alone is not sufficient where data are stored or read and are relevant
to the metrological characteristics of the instrument.
3.4.2.2  Continuous signals (analogue signals)
3.4.2.2.1  Micro-wave circuits shall ensure a long-term stability of tuning (2 years) of approximately ± 0.2 %
in frequency.
3.4.2.2.2  The gain of analogue channels shall have no influence on results, or its effects shall be
periodically checked (see point 2.9).
4  Handbook
The manufacturer shall provide each radar with a handbook (see point 2.1) which shall be officially
approved with the instrument's pattern. This handbook shall contain at least:
- the theory of operation of the equipment,
- an explanation of the general operating schematic,
- an accurate specification of normal operating conditions,
- the modes of operation,
- information on the principal causes of errors,
- a review of the influence quantities affecting the measurements, and of the partial errors they may
induce,
- for radars designed to work without an operator, the information required in point 2.7.
5  Protection against tampering
It shall be possible to seal or otherwise protect those parts which, if tampered with, could lead to errors
in measurement or to metrologically unreliable operation.
6  Identification of the equipment
The instrument, or each separately housed subunit, shall carry, in indelible lettering, the following
indications:
- the name (or trade mark) and address of the manufacturer or his representative,

=====PAGE 8=====
8
- the type indication and serial number of the instrument,
- an indication of necessary connecting units by type number and, if not interchangeable, by serial
number.
7  Pattern approval
7.1  Metrological tests in the laboratory
7.1.1  Test conditions
Reference value
Range
Ambient temperature
+ 20 °C
− 20 °C, + 60 °C (1)
Ambient humidity
60 %
either value, non condensing
Power voltage
nominal
− 10 %, + 20 % of nominal
at least (2)
Frequency (if applicable)
nominal
nominal ± 3 %
Length of time since
switched on
any
Radars shall be tested at + 20 °C and at minimum and maximum applicable temperatures with different
power voltages; humidity and power frequency shall be varied only if they have a noticeable influence.
For each factor mentioned above, its variation throughout the whole defined range shall not induce a
change of indication greater than 50 % of the moduli of the maximum permissible errors given in points
7.1.2 and 7.1.3.
7.1.2  Testing of micro-wave section
Radiation pattern and power limitation: 
the requirements of point 2.4 shall apply
Aiming device: 
the requirements of point 2.3 shall apply
Frequency range and oscillator stability:
shall conform to national regulations.
Note:
Pattern approval is also dependent on certification by the authority for communications
equipment.
7.1.3  Testing of the low-frequency section
From the frequency fd of the simulated Doppler signal the theorical speed indication shall be computed
thus:
vd = 0.5 × fd × λ /cos α
where: λ = the emitted wavelength
α = the average effective angle of incidence (3)
                    
(1)
This range is for parts installed outdoors; for parts installed in cars or shelters, the range is defined by the manufacturer
and shall include at least the range  (0 °C, + 50 °C).
(2)
The lower limit shall be the switch-off point as defined in point 2.8.
(3)
This angle may be different from the geometric angle between beam axis and street direction, as a vehicle's speed may
sometimes be measured shortly after the vehicle enters the beam, or - due to delaying actions of discriminating circuits,
for instance - after its passing the beam axis. The resulting average is different for traffic entering the beam from
behind or from the front. If the manufacturer wishes such differences to be considered he shall indicate the appropriate
average values to be used in the computation.

=====PAGE 9=====
9
All errors of indication (referred to vd) under reference conditions shall be less than ± 1 km/h, or ± 1 %
at speeds above 100 km/h.
For instruments with digital indication, fd shall be varied until the average switching (rounding) point
is found, which shall be presumed to be halfway in value between the two neighbouring indications. If, in
fact, fractions of the least significant digit are discounted (rounding down), this is to be considered as an
average scale shift.
7.1.4  Neither attenuation to the limit of reception of the signal mentioned in point 7.1.3 nor limitations of its
duration shall provoke errors greater than those prescribed in point 7.1.3.
7.1.5  Discriminating circuits, preliminary tests
Functions mentioned in points 2.2, 2.5, 2.8 and (if applicable) 2.4 and 2.7 shall be tested using the
following procedures:
- lowering the power voltage below the limit of 90 % nominal, to the point of automatic cut-off
(point 2.8),
- sweeping the frequency fd (point 7.1.3), mixing of two such frequencies, feeding them to the circuits
with interruptions or in bursts
Specific values of frequency cannot be given, due to differences in emitter frequencies and beam
widths. A frequency step corresponding to the arrival of a second vehicle with a speed difference of
3.5 km/h or more (3.5 % or more at speeds above 100 km/h) shall inhibit the output of a result, or the
lower speed shall be output.
Brief frequency variations, simulating measurement instabilities, shall inhibit the output when their
influence on the result can be more than 2 km/h (or more than 2 % at speeds  above 100 km/h).
Further tests will result from the tests of electronic and logical components (points 7.2 and 3.4) which
will be effected in the following stage.
7.2  Tests of effects of infuence factors and disturbances
The tests that shall be performed and the criteria of acceptance are described in the Annex.
7.3  Metrological field tests (to be performed after the tests of point 7.2)
It is recommended that the metrological tests be completed by an operating test in actual traffic. This
overall study of possible errors seems indispensable due to the complexity of factors affecting the result
of a measurement (shape of antenna lobe, lateral distance between radar and passing vehicle, reflection
characteristics of the latter, change of lane during passage through beam, braking, delays in measurement
due to the presence of more than one vehicle, etc).
The error distribution shall be determined under conditions of variable speed and traffic density, and if
possible at various temperatures.
The average error of all results shall be within ± 1 km/h.
For pattern approval, 500 measurements shall be made, of which none shall give a positive error larger
than + 3 km/h (or + 3 % at speeds above 100 km/h). Results that are recognizable as faulty by any user
familiar with the handbook shall be discounted.
If fewer measurements are made, they are to be considered as a sample which, by its result, shall
validate the same error limits as would 500 measurements.
For autonomous radars, the results shall confirm the level of confidence required (see point 2.7).

=====PAGE 10=====
10
The measuring system used for comparison shall have an uncertainty better than one third of that of the
radar under test; 99.8 % of its results should have errors that are within ± 1 km/h (or ± 1 % at speeds
above 100 km/h).
7.4  Conformity to approved pattern
The approved pattern is defined by the instrument's characteristics determining its metrological
integrity.
As long as the metrological integrity depends on internal logical protections, the origin of the
electronic elements is not so important. On the contrary, the structure of the checking circuits, the way in
which they function and the programs which control them are important and are to be maintained in
instruments manufactured according to an approved pattern. In consequence:
- the manufacturer shall submit details of the instrument's logic,
- he shall disclose and discuss with the metrology services all changes in the approved pattern in this
regard,
- the relevant services shall develop and maintain a safe storage system for such information; one
solution is to sign the documents submitted and place them in the custody of the manufacturer or his
representative.

=====PAGE 11=====
11
ANNEX
TESTS OF EFFECTS OF INFLUENCE FACTORS AND DISTURBANCES
These tests are listed in the order of the requirements of this Recommendation to which they relate.
International Document OIML D 11 "General requirements for electronic measuring instruments"
(1986 edition) has been used wherever applicable and, for such tests, the appropriate severity level is
given. Durability tests have been omitted because of the extent of internal logic protection required by
this Recommendation.
If appropriate, tests are provided with references to the Publications of the International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), where detailed information on test procedures and test equipment
may be found.
A.1  Mechanical strength test (point 3.2 of the Recommendation)
Mechanical shock
The radar is tilted about one bottom edge with a height of the opposite edge of 50 mm and then
allowed to fall freely. The test requires one fall about each bottom edge.
After the test, a check as per point 7.1.2 shall be performed (frequency and variations in radiated
power).
Reference to OIML D 11: point A.2.5, severity level 2
Reference to IEC: Publication 68.2.31
A.2  Climatic resistance test (point 3.3 of the Recommendation)
a) Dry heat - cold
The test simulates storage conditions, with the exception that the radar shall be mounted on a tripod to
provide maximum exposure.
The dry heat test shall have a duration of 2 hours at 70 °C, the cold test 2 hours at − 25 °C, the radar
being out of service.
After each test a check of the oscillator frequency (point 7.1.2) and a check of the conversion factor of
the indication (point 7.1.3) shall be performed.
Reference to OIML D 11: point A.2.1.1 and A.2.1.2, severity levels 4 (dry heat) and 3 (cold)
Reference to IEC: Publications 68.2.1, 68.2.2 and 68.3.1
b) Damp heat, condensing
Immediately following the cold test, those parts of the radar which in normal use may be exposed to
cold (other parts may be protected by closed plastic bags) shall be placed in a room at + 20 °C, with a
humidity of about 80 %. The radar shall be put into the operating state and switched on for one hour after
leaving the cold chamber. Partial checks in accordance with points 7.1.2 (radiation power), 7.1.3
(accuracy) and 7.1.4 (sensitivity) shall show that no incorrect indications result from condensation.
c) Water splash test for parts exposed to water
One bucket of about 10 litres of water shall be thrown from a distance of 3 m against each side of the
radar, once from above and once from below, with the instrument in operation.

=====PAGE 12=====
12
Checks according to points 7.1.2 (power) and 7.1.3 (accuracy) shall show that the water splashes have
no effect. The radar shall be inspected to check that no water has entered it.
A.3  Tests of reliability of electronic and logical components (point 3.4 of the Recommendation)
a) Power variations for battery-powered radars: see point 7.1.1.
b) Bursts
Bursts of voltage spikes are superimposed on the mains voltage, with an amplitude of 1 kV, throughout
the time necessary to simulate five speed measurements.
Checks according to point 7.1.3 (accuracy) shall show either that the result corresponds to fd or that the
indication disappears.
Reference to OIML D 11: point A.2.8.2, severity level 2
Reference to IEC: Publication 801-4
c) Electromagnetic susceptibility
The radar is exposed to an electromagnetic field strength of 10 V/m at frequencies between 27 MHz
and 500 MHz and of 3 V/m at frequencies between 500 MHz and 1 000 MHz,the amplitude modulation
being at a frequency which corresponds to the Doppler frequency for a speed of 60 km/h.
Checks shall be performed according to points 7.1.3 (accuracy), 7.1.4 (sensitivity) and 7.1.5
(discrimination of speed variations and of the presence of more than one vehicle).
Reference to OIML D 11: point A.2.10, severity levels 6 and 8
Reference to IEC: Publication 801-3
*
* *
After completion of all the tests of the effects of influence factors and disturbances, all the tests of
point 7.1 of the Recommendation shall be repeated with a suitable subset of characteristics to determine
deviations from the initial intrinsic error.

=====PAGE 13=====
13
Contents
Foreword ..................................................................................................................................................... 2
1.      Scope.................................................................................................................................................... 3
2.      Rules of correct operation ................................................................................................................... 3
3.      Construction......................................................................................................................................... 5
4.      Handbook............................................................................................................................................. 7
5.      Protection against tampering ............................................................................................................... 7
6.      Identification of the equipment............................................................................................................ 7
7.      Pattern approval................................................................................................................................... 8
Annex
Tests of effects of influence factors and disturbances.............................................................. 11
