
    City of Chicago :: Children's Safety Zone Program & Automated Speed Enforcement
Skip to main content
An official website of the City of Chicago
Here's how you know
The .gov means it's official
Municipal government websites often end in .gov or .org. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you're on a City of Chicago government site.
The site is secure.
The 
https://
 ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.
MENU
Chicago
I Want To
Apply For
Check Status Of
Find / Get
Pay for/ buy
Register
Report / File
Request
Signup for/ Volunteer
Programs and Initiatives
Affordable Chicago
Chicago Recovery Plan
Community Safety
Consumer Protection
Cut the Tape
Education
Environment
Food Service Establishments
Freedom of Information (FOIA)
Grants
Health & Wellness
Housing
Inspections, Permitting & Licensing
Jobs
Municipal Marketing
My CHI. My Future.
Public Safety
Taxes
Technology
Transparency
Transportation
Vendor Impact Fund
Government
Elected Officials
Mayor's Office
City Clerk
City Treasurer
City Council (Your Ward & Aldermen)
Other City Agencies
City Colleges
City Council Office of Financial Analysis
Housing Authority (CHA)
Park District
Public Building Commission
Public Schools
Transit Authority (CTA)
Metro Pier & Exposition Authority
Departments
311 City Services
Administrative Hearings
Animal Care & Control
Aviation
Budget & Management
Buildings
Bus. Affairs & Consumer Protection
City of Chicago TV
Civilian Office of Police Accountability
Community Commission for Public Safety &  Accountability
Cultural Affairs & Special Events
Emergency Mgmt & Communications
Environment
Ethics
Family & Support Services
Finance
Fire
Fleet & Facility Management
Housing
Human Relations
Human Resources
Inspector General
Law
License Appeal Commission
People with Disabilities
Planning & Development
Police 
Police Board
Procurement Services
Public Health
Public Library
Public Safety Administration
Streets & Sanitation
Technology & Innovation
Transportation
Water Management
Legislation and Regulation
Municipal Code
Construction Codes
Zoning and Land Use Ordinance
City of Chicago Rules Portal
Other
Employee Phone Directory
Boards & Commissions
City Holidays (Offices Closed)
About
Chicago History
Facts and Statistics
Attractions
Social Media Accounts
Accessibility
Search
Transportation
What We Do
Automated Enforcement
Bicycling
Bridges, Viaducts, and Waterways
Conservation & Sustainable Transportation
Construction, Permits, Utilities and Contracts
Major Projects, Programs and Studies
Pedestrians
Public Transportation and Stations
Streets, Alleys and Sidewalks
Traffic Safety, Signals, Lights and Signs
Quick Links 
Connect With Us
Careers with CDOT
Online Permit Portal
CDOT Procurement News
Chi311
Latest News
Home
Departments
Transportation
Supporting Info
Children's Safety Zone Program & Automated Speed Enforcement
Children's Safety Zone Program & Automated Speed Enforcement
NEW:
 Effective March 1, 2021, City of Chicago began issuing $35 tickets to motorists driving 6-10 MPH over the speed limit in all active Children’s Safety Speed Enforcement Zones. Motorists driving 10+ MPH over the speed limit are subject to a $100 fine.  
Motorists should always observe the posted enforcement signage near all automated speed enforcement cameras
Each year, Chicago experiences roughly 3,000 crashes, in which a motor vehicle collides with a pedestrian; 16% of these crashes involve children.
The Children’s Safety Zone Program protects children, pedestrians, and other vulnerable roadway users by reminding motorists to slow down and obey speed limits – especially in areas near schools and parks.  Safety Zones are defined as an area within 1/8th of a mile distance of parks or schools. 
The Program uses enhanced signage, pavement markings, and automated radar-equipped cameras to identify and ticket motorists who are breaking the law by exceeding the posted speed limit.  Tickets are issued to the registered owner of the speeding vehicle.
The automated speed enforcement cameras are only one part of the “toolbox,” which the City uses to enhance safety for our children and all residents traveling within the safety zones.  In addition to enforcement, education and encouragement programs, the City utilizes engineering treatments, including:Pedestrian refuge islands
Pedestrian refuge islands
Safety zone signage and pavement markings
High-visibility crosswalk markings
Speed feedback signs
Speed humps
Traffic signal improvements
Curb and ramp improvements
Pedestrian countdown timers
Lead pedestrian intervals
In-street “Stop for Pedestrians” signs
The City ordinance establishing the Children’s Safety Zone program substantially narrows the hours and locations of automated speed enforcement, which is allowed under state law, and provides for the following:
Enforcement hours around 
schools
 will be limited to 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. on school days (Monday through Friday). Some school safety zones enforce different speed limits depending on whether a child is present, as follows:
7 a.m. to 4 p.m.: 20 miles per hour (mph) speed limit when children are present; and the posted speed limit when no children are present, 
and
7 a.m. to 7 p.m.: The posted speed limit
Enforcement hours around 
parks
 will be limited to only those hours when each park is open (typically 6 a.m. to 11 p.m., 7 days a week)
Warning notices (without fines) will be issued for the first 30 days after each new camera is installed and activated in a new or existing Safety Zone
The first time a vehicle is recorded speeding in a Children’s Safety Zone, the registered vehicle owner will receive a warning notice instead of a ticket
Fines for violations are: $35 for vehicles traveling 6-10 mph over the posted speed limit, and $100 for vehicles traveling 11 or more mph over the posted speed limit.
Furthermore, the City has capped the number of locations where speed cameras can be installed to 20% of the approximately 1,500 Safety Zone locations allowed under state law.  This limits the number of enforced Safety Zones to approximately 300 Safety Zones.
Camera locations are chosen based on available data and analysis related to traffic, speeding, and crashes.  The City has established six geographical regions wherein no fewer than 10% of all speed enforcement safety zones will be located.  This is to ensure a geographically equitable distribution of the program. The first automated speed enforcement cameras were activated in August 2013.
Revenue from the program will be used for programs that enhance the safety of children, including after-school, anti-violence and youth employment programs; crossing guards and police officers around schools; and infrastructure improvements, such as signage, crosswalk markings, traffic calming, and other traffic safety improvements.
A pedestrian hit by a car traveling 20 mph – the posted speed limit in school zones – has a 95% chance of surviving that crash.  That same person hit by a car traveling at 40 mph has only an 20% chance of surviving.
Speed is among the biggest determinants of whether a crash results in a serious or fatal injury, rather than a minor injury, no injury, or even no crash at all.  Reducing incidents of speeding – keeping vehicles to the posted speed limits, appropriately set for the context – will save lives.  The Children’s Safety Zone Program protects children and other pedestrians by reminding motorists to slow down and obey speed laws – especially in school and park zones.
List of Activated Speed Cameras and Enforcement Schedule
How do Automated Speed Enforcement Cameras Work?
Automated Speed Enforcement Signage
Automated Speed Enforcement FAQ
Map of Camera Locations on Traffic Tracker
List of all Children's Safety Zones with Crash Data
Child Safety Zone Ranking Methodology
Chicago Automated Speed Enforcement Camera “Before-After” Safety Impact Analysis (Oct. 2025)
School Calendar Resources
Home
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Web Standards
Site Credits
Site Map
Contact Us
Press Room
City of Chicago
Copyright © 2010 - 2026 City of Chicago
Video Title
Close
Image Title
Close
