
Regulations - Pennsylvania Work Zone Speed Safety Cameras
Pennsylvania Work Zone Speed Safety Cameras
 Menu
Home
About
Regulations
Locations
FAQs
Safety
Violations
Hearings
Contact Us
Regulations
The Pennsylvania General Assembly passed a law to allow an Work Zone Speed Safety Cameras (WZSSC) program in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The legislation, 
Act 86 of 2018
, was introduced in January 2017 during Regular Session 2017-2018 and amends Title 75 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes by adding 
Section 3369 – Automated Speed Enforcement Systems in Active Work Zones
 and amending 
Section 3368 – Speed Timing Devices
. 
Act 38 of 2023
 was signed into law on December 14, 2023 and provides for the permanent implementation of the program.
What YOU Need to Know:
WZSSC systems in active work zones
Work zones must be active (workers present) for the WZSSC systems to be operational.
Work zones behind barriers are considered “active” for the purpose of this program.
Two warning signs must be provided before the WZSSC location.
At least one of the signs must indicate when the WZSSC is active.
A speed limit sign must be provided after the first advance warning sign.
A notice must be posted at the active work zone indicating the location of the WZSSC system (e.g. sign located at or on the WZSSC vehicle).
A notice identifying WZSSC locations must be posted on the 
transportation agency’s website
.
Use of electronic speed-timing devices (radar or nonradar) to detect vehicles exceeding the posted speed limit by 11 mph or more.
Once detected, WZSSC system records an image of the license plate, captures vehicle speed and identifies to whom the vehicle is registered.
A violation notice is prepared and mailed to the vehicle owner.
Penalties
First offense – warning letter.
Second offense – violation notice and $75 fine.
Third (and subsequent) offense – violation notice and $150 fine.
A 15-day warning period is provided between the mail date of the first violation and the occurrence of a second violation.
Civil penalty only; no criminal penalty.
No points on license or impact to merit rating for insurance purposes.
Violations may be contested up to 30 days from the mailing of the notice.
Fines collected are used to pay for the cost of program operation and maintenance.
PennDOT, PA Turnpike, and PSP are required to submit an annual report by April 1.
Pay a fine on a violation received in the mail
.
Right-to-Know Law Applicability
Information and data, including images collected via the WZSSC program, are not considered public record under the Right-to-Know Law.
Information can be provided to law enforcement officials only by court order if information is solely connected to a criminal law enforcement action.
Home
About
Regulations
Locations
FAQs
Safety
Violations
Hearings
Contact Us
 2022 © Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Translate »
 