
	RCW 46.63.200: 
Menu
Website Search Term
Search 
                Menu
Menu
Website Search Term
Search 
Bills, meetings, and session
Bills, meetings, and session
Bills
How to track a bill
How to comment on a bill
Help with bills
Data and statistics
Prefiled bills for 2025
Meeting schedules
Session
How to testify at a committee meeting
Session documents
Initiatives and referenda
State laws and rules
State laws and rules
Washington State Constitution
State laws (RCW)
Session laws
Past versions of state laws
Help with state laws
State rules (WAC)
Past versions of state rules
Washington State Register
Rule-making help
Rule-making activity
Rule Drafting Service (RDS)
Learn and participate
Learn and participate
Civic education programs
Page Program
Internship Program
Legislative Scholar Program
How a bill becomes a law
How to participate in the lawmaking process
Educational resources
Classroom and learning materials
Legislative documents in alphabetical order
Pension education
State symbols
Civics organizations
State budgets (fiscal.wa.gov)
Glossary of legislative terms
Legislators
Legislators
District Finder
Legislator directories
How to send a message to a legislator
House and Senate class photos
House Class Photos
Senate Class Photos
About the Legislature
About the Legislature
House of Representatives
House Administration
Office of Program Research
Senate
Senate Committee Services
Schedules
Leadership
Administration
Committees
Legislative Information Center
Legislative agencies
Joint Legislative Audit and Review Committee (JLARC)
Joint Transportation Committee (JTC)
Legislative Ethics Board (LEB)
Legislative Evaluation and Accountability Program (LEAP) Committee
Legislative Service Center (LEG-TECH)
Legislative Support Services (LSS)
Office of the Code Reviser (CRO)
Office of State Legislative Labor Relations (OSLLR)
Office of the State Actuary (OSA)
Legislative procedures
House rules
Senate rules
Joint rules
Reed's Rules
Senate emergency parliamentary rules
Senate committee room rules
Code Reviser's Office Procedures
Ethics Board rules
Washington State Constitution
Ethics
Ethics advisory opinions
Ethics complaint opinions
Ethics alerts
Ethics reports
Ethics complaint form
History of the Legislature
Enabling Act
Territorial history
Senate Presidents
Preserving Capitol furniture
Home
 / 
State laws and rules
 / 
RCWs
 / 
Title 46
 / 
Chapter 46.63
 / 
Section 46.63.200
Print
46.63.190
  << 
                46.63.200 >>  
46.63.210
PDF
RCW  46.63.200
Speed safety camera systems—State highway work zones—Department of transportation—Washington state patrol—Notice of infraction—Revenue—Report. 
(Expires June 30, 2030.)
(1) This section applies to the use of speed safety camera systems in state highway work zones.
(2) Nothing in this section prohibits a law enforcement officer from issuing a notice of infraction to a person in control of a vehicle at the time a violation occurs under RCW  
46.63.030
(1) (a), (b), or (c).
(3)(a) The department of transportation is responsible for all actions related to the operation and administration of speed safety camera systems in state highway work zones including, but not limited to, the procurement and administration of contracts necessary for the implementation of speed safety camera systems, the mailing of notices of infraction, and the development and maintenance of a public-facing website for the purpose of educating the traveling public about the use of speed safety camera systems in state highway work zones. Prior to the use of a speed safety camera system to capture a violation established in this section for enforcement purposes, the department of transportation, in consultation with the Washington state patrol, department of licensing, office of administrative hearings, Washington traffic safety commission, and other organizations committed to protecting civil rights, must adopt rules addressing such actions and take all necessary steps to implement this section.
(b) The Washington state patrol is responsible for all actions related to the enforcement and adjudication of speed violations under this section including, but not limited to, notice of infraction verification and issuance authorization, and determining which types of emergency vehicles are exempt from being issued notices of infraction under this section. Prior to the use of a speed safety camera system to capture a violation established in this section for enforcement purposes, the Washington state patrol, in consultation with the department of transportation, department of licensing, office of administrative hearings, Washington traffic safety commission, and other organizations committed to protecting civil rights, must adopt rules addressing such actions and take all necessary steps to implement this section.
(c) When establishing rules under this subsection (3), the department of transportation and the Washington state patrol may also consult with other public and private agencies that have an interest in the use of speed safety camera systems in state highway work zones.
(4)(a) No person may drive a vehicle in a state highway work zone at a speed greater than that allowed by traffic control devices.
(b) A notice of infraction may only be issued under this section if a speed safety camera system captures a speed violation in a state highway work zone when workers are present.
(5) The penalty for a speed safety camera system violation is: (a) $125 for the first violation; and (b) $248 for the second violation, and for each violation thereafter.
(6) During the 30-day period after the first speed safety camera system is put in place, the department is required to conduct a public awareness campaign to inform the public of the use of speed safety camera systems in state highway work zones.
(7)(a) A notice of infraction issued under this section may be mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle within 30 days of the violation, or to the renter of a vehicle within 30 days of establishing the renter's name and address. The law enforcement officer issuing the notice of infraction shall include with it a certificate or facsimile thereof, based upon inspection of photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images produced by a speed safety camera stating the facts supporting the notice of infraction. This certificate or facsimile is prima facie evidence of the facts contained in it and is admissible in a proceeding charging a violation under this section. The photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images evidencing the violation must be available for inspection and admission into evidence in a proceeding to adjudicate the liability for the violation.
(b) A notice of infraction represents a determination that an infraction has been committed, and the determination will be final unless contested as provided under this section.
(c) A person receiving a notice of infraction based on evidence detected by a speed safety camera system must, within 30 days of receiving the notice of infraction: (i) Remit payment in the amount of the penalty assessed for the violation; (ii) contest the determination that the infraction occurred by following the instructions on the notice of infraction; or (iii) admit to the infraction but request a hearing to explain mitigating circumstances surrounding the infraction.
(d) If a person fails to respond to a notice of infraction, a final order shall be entered finding that the person committed the infraction and assessing monetary penalties required under subsection (5) of this section.
(e) If a person contests the determination that the infraction occurred or requests a mitigation hearing, the notice of infraction shall be referred to the office of administrative hearings for adjudication consistent with chapter  
34.05
 RCW.
(f) At a hearing to contest an infraction, the agency issuing the infraction has the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the infraction was committed.
(g) A person may request a payment plan at any time for the payment of any penalty or other monetary obligation associated with an infraction under this section. The agency issuing the infraction shall provide information about how to submit evidence of inability to pay, how to obtain a payment plan, and that failure to pay or enter into a payment plan may result in collection action or nonrenewal of the vehicle registration. The office of administrative hearings may authorize a payment plan if it determines that a person is not able to pay the monetary obligation, and it may modify a payment plan at any time.
(8)(a) Speed safety camera systems may only take photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images of the vehicle and vehicle license plate and only while a speed violation is occurring. The photograph, microphotograph, or electronic image must not reveal the face of the driver or any passengers in the vehicle. The department of transportation shall consider installing speed safety camera systems in a manner that minimizes the impact of camera flash on drivers.
(b) The registered owner of a vehicle is responsible for a traffic infraction under RCW  
46.63.030
 unless the registered owner overcomes the presumption in RCW  
46.63.075
 or, in the case of a rental car business, satisfies the conditions under (f) of this subsection. If appropriate under the circumstances, a renter identified under (f)(i) of this subsection is responsible for the traffic infraction.
(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images, or any other personally identifying data prepared under this section are for the exclusive use of the Washington state patrol and department of transportation in the discharge of duties under this section and are not open to the public and may not be used in court in a pending action or proceeding unless the action or proceeding relates to a speed violation under this section. This data may be used in administrative appeal proceedings relative to a violation under this section.
(d) All locations where speed safety camera systems are used must be clearly marked before activation of the camera system by placing signs in locations that clearly indicate to a driver that they are entering a state highway work zone where posted speed limits are monitored by a speed safety camera system. Additionally, where feasible and constructive, radar speed feedback signs will be placed in advance of the speed safety camera system to assist drivers in complying with posted speed limits. Signs placed in these locations must follow the specifications and guidelines under the manual of uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways as adopted by the department of transportation under chapter  
47.36
 RCW.
(e) Imposition of a penalty for a speed violation detected through the use of speed safety camera systems shall not be deemed a conviction as defined in RCW  
46.25.010
, and shall not be part of the registered owner's driving record under RCW  
46.52.101
 and  
46.52.120
. Additionally, infractions generated by the use of speed safety camera systems under this section shall be processed in the same manner as parking infractions, including for the purposes of RCW  
46.16A.120
 and  
46.20.270
(2).
(f) If the registered owner of the vehicle is a rental car business, the department of transportation shall, before a notice of infraction may be issued under this section, provide a written notice to the rental car business that a notice of infraction may be issued to the rental car business if the rental car business does not, within 30 days of receiving the written notice, provide to the issuing agency by return mail:
(i)(A) A statement under oath stating the name and known mailing address of the individual driving or renting the vehicle when the speed violation occurred;
(B) A statement under oath that the business is unable to determine who was driving or renting the vehicle at the time the speed violation occurred because the vehicle was stolen at the time of the violation. A statement provided under this subsection (8)(f)(i)(B) must be accompanied by a copy of a filed police report regarding the vehicle theft; or
(C) In lieu of identifying the vehicle operator, payment of the applicable penalty.
(ii) Timely mailing of a statement to the department of transportation relieves a rental car business of any liability under this chapter for the notice of infraction.
(9) Revenue generated from the deployment of speed safety camera systems must be deposited into the highway safety fund and first used exclusively for the operating and administrative costs under this section. The operation of speed safety camera systems is intended to increase safety in state highway work zones by changing driver behavior. Any revenue generated that exceeds the operating and administrative costs under this section must be transferred to the driver education safety improvement account created in RCW  
46.68.540
 as designated in the omnibus transportation appropriations act.
(10) The Washington state patrol and department of transportation, in collaboration with the Washington traffic safety commission, must report to the transportation committees of the legislature by July 1, 2025, and biennially thereafter, on the data and efficacy of speed safety camera system use in state highway work zones. The final report due on July 1, 2029, must include a recommendation on whether or not to continue such speed safety camera system use beyond June 30, 2030.
(11) For the purposes of this section:
(a) "Speed safety camera system" means employing the use of speed measuring devices and cameras synchronized to automatically record one or more sequenced photographs, microphotographs, or other electronic images of a motor vehicle that exceeds a posted state highway work zone speed limit as detected by the speed measuring devices.
(b) "State highway work zone" means an area of any highway with construction, maintenance, utility work, or incident response activities authorized by the department of transportation. A state highway work zone is identified by the placement of temporary traffic control devices that may include signs, channelizing devices, barriers, pavement markings, and/or work vehicles with warning lights. It extends from the first warning sign or high intensity rotating, flashing, oscillating, or strobe lights on a vehicle to the end road work sign or the last temporary traffic control device or vehicle.
(12) This section expires June 30, 2030.
[ 
2025 c 417 s 304
;  
2025 c 299 s 19
;  
2024 c 308 s 4
;  
2023 c 17 s 3
.]
Notes:
Reviser's note:
 This section was amended by 2025 c 299 s 19 and by 2025 c 417 s 304, each without reference to the other. Both amendments are incorporated in the publication of this section under RCW  
1.12.025
(2). For rule of construction, see RCW  
1.12.025
(1).
Effective date
—
2025 c 417 ss 304 and 1201-1224:
 "Sections 304 and 1201 through 1224 of this act take effect July 1, 2026." [ 
2025 c 417 s 1409
.]
Findings
—
Intent
—
2025 c 417:
 See note following RCW  
82.38.030
.
Findings
—
Intent
—
2025 c 299:
 See note following RCW  
46.20.1191
.
Legislative questions or comments
                    Call the Legislative Hotline
1-800-562-6000
TTY for deaf/hard of hearing: 
1-800-833-6388
Learn more about the Legislative Hotline
Studies, audits, and reports
Performance audits
Actuarial reporting
Transportation studies and reports
Reports from outside organizations
Investigation reports
Accessibility
Jobs
                                    Public records requests
Site help
Contact us
Email updates (GovDelivery)
Disclaimer
Privacy Notice
 Copyright 2025. All Rights Reserved.
