 AMBA Equipment Insurance | Powered by Insureon AMBA Equipment Insurance
 Who is eligible for coverage?
 AFM musicians, including:
 Freelance musicians
 Recording and digital media musicians
 Symphonic musicians
 Theater musicians
 What equipment is covered?
 It covers a range of equipment, including:
 Instruments
 Computers
 Audio equipment
 Cases
 Sheet music
 Stands
 Cables
 How much does music equipment insurance cost?
 The cost of your equipment insurance coverage primarily depends on a few different factors, including the age and value of your equipment.
 The average annual premium based on your equipment value is as follows:
 Replacement value Annual premium 
 Up to $32,000
 $249
 $35,000
 $272
 $40,000
 $311
 $50,000
 $389
 $75,000
 $583
 $100,000
 $777
 How to get equipment insurance coverage
 New and existing customers can get equipment coverage by taking the following steps:
 For new customers
 Fill out our simple online application to get our specialized equipment coverage.
 Need other insurance products as well? Contact our licensed insurance specialist to get quotes for the additional coverage you need.
 For current customers
 Customers with policies that have expired or will expire soon under AMBA’s Equipment Insurance Program through Accelerant National Insurance Company will automatically be sent an email from AMBA with renewal instructions for your expiring policy.  You may quickly ‘renew as is’ or ‘renew with changes’ and a quote will be sent to you.
 There are two renewal options.
 Renew online (up to 60 days in advance)
 Login to your account 
 Renew using your Renewal Supplement (sent 30 days prior to your expiration date)
 Follow detailed binding, payment, and submission instructions on the renewal document
 How do I get business insurance?
 It’s easy to get equipment insurance and other policies from top-rated U.S. providers. Your dedicated agent will help you find policies that meet your unique insurance needs.
 Call us
 (312) 724-8592 
 Email us
 [email protected] 
 Privacy Policy | Terms of Use | Licenses | Compensation Disclosure | Accessibility Statement 
 © 2026 Insureon , a division of Specialty Program Group LLC / DBA SPG Insurance Solutions ALL RIGHTS RESERVED (CA License #0L09546) The information provided on this website does not constitute insurance advice. All content and materials are for general informational purposes only. Complete Insureon's online application and contact one of our licensed insurance professionals to obtain advice for your specific business insurance needs.
 