 
 AHS Insurance • American Harp Society 
 AHS Live! 
 Chapters 
 Join/Renew 
 myAHS Login 
 Search 
 Menu
 Explore 
 About
 Who We Are 
 Leadership 
 Governance 
 IDEA (Inclusion, Diversity, Equity, and Access) Committee 
 Leadership
 -->
 Governance
 -->
 Publications
 American Harp Journal 
 Advertising 
 Noteworthy News 
 Salzedo and Grandjany Centennial Fund Publications 
 Legacy Publications 
 Shop
 Store 
 Events
 2030 Conference 
 2027 AHS Harp Ensemble Festival 
 AHS Live! 
 Event Calendar 
 New to the Harp?
 Getting Started 
 Professional Directory 
 Discover More
 Harp Dissertations 
 AHS Grants Impact 
 International Harp Archives at UNT 
 AHS Repository (Library of Congress) 
 Participate 
 Programs
 Chapter Ambassadors Program 
 Chapter of the Year 
 Concert Artist Program 
 Emerging Artists Program 
 Grants Program 
 Music Education Auditions and Evaluations Program 
 Young Composers Project 
 Competition & Awards
 AHS National Competition 
 Lifetime Achievement Award 
 Ruth Wickersham Papalia Award 
 Kids for Camp Awards 
 The American Harp Journal Collegiate Writers Award 
 Weiger Lepke-Sims Family Sacred Music Award 
 Additional Awards 
 Events
 2026 One Harp World 
 2030 Conference 
 2027 AHS Harp Ensemble Festival 
 AHS Live! 
 Event Calendar 
 Volunteer
 Board Nominations 
 Opportunities 
 Community 
 Membership
 Member Benefits 
 Join or Renew 
 Special Group Memberships 
 Membership Directory 
 myAHS Login 
 Membership Directory 
 -->
 Chapters & Regions
 Join a Chapter 
 Start a Chapter 
 Regions 
 Chapter Resources 
 Our Legacy
 The Founding of AHS 
 In Memoriam 
 Jazz Harp Pioneers 
 AHS Interview Series 
 Past Presidents & Board Chairmen 
 Past National Events 
 Give 
 Give
 Giving to the AHS 
 AHS Annual Fund 
 Give Via Your Donor Advised Fund 
 Leave A Legacy 
 AHS Insurance
 Insurance Program
 Anderson Musical Instrument Insurance Solutions, LLC  is the endorsed agent for the American Harp Society Musical Instrument Insurance Program. Anderson Group, located in Sebring, FL (USA), is devoted exclusively to insuring musical instruments and valuable articles worldwide for musicians, musician associations, orchestras, collectors and musical instrument dealers. Anderson specializes in insuring harps as well as all types of musical instruments, and electronic equipment. Anderson is also the endorsed agent for harp insurance for the World Harp Congress, the International Society of Folk Harpers and Craftsmen, The Harp Centre of Australia and the New Zealand Harp Society.
 Insurance coverage provided to the American Harp Society and its Participating Members under policy #IHN 9407647 by  The Hanover Insurance Company  to the American Harp Society and its Participating Members under policy #IHN 9407647. You must be a member in good standing of the American Harp Society to participate in this program.
 IMPORTANT NOTICE REGARDING INSURING INSTRUMENTS RENTED TO OTHERS 
Anderson Insurance and the American Harp Society want to remind anyone that rents or intends to rent an instrument to others that is insured in the American Harp Society Harp Insurance Program that coverage is capped at $1,000 without receiving prior underwriting approval. Please visit  www.anderson-group.com/faqs.html#rent  for more information.
 Highlights of the AHS Insurance Program: 
 The AHS Harp Insurance program offers the most competitive pricing for harp insurance worldwide. $165 USD per year insures up to $25,455 of instruments! Want  MORE SAVINGS  and rate protection?  Ask about our Anderson’s 3 year guaranteed premium option. Pay 2.25 years up front and receive the 3rd year premium at a deeply discounted cost providing savings of  25% per year ; smart savings!
 Cause of Loss: 
"All risk" Coverage, except as excluded, is provided for your instruments and related equipment and accessories.
 Valuation Clause: 
This “all risk” coverage is provided on an "agreed value" basis. Once Anderson accepts a requested valuation, that insurance limit will be the amount agreed to be the value for the purpose of this insurance.
 Coverage Territory: 
Musical instruments are covered on a worldwide basis.
 Rate per $100 of insured value: 
The AHS Harp Insurance program rate of $.55/$100 of insured value.
 Rental Reimbursement Coverage: 
Provides coverage up to $225 per month for up to 12 months subject to timely repair of a covered loss on a damaged instrument IF you do not have an equivalent idle instrument. (Included at no additional charge to participating AHS Harp Insurance members in good standing.)
 Detailed information can be found at: 
 www.anderson-group.com/ahs-harp-insurance.html 
or by visiting
 www.harpinsurance.com 
 Coverage provided by
 Community
 AHS Live! 
 Professional Directory 
 Getting Started 
 Membership Directory 
 Events
 Events Calendar 
 National Conference 
 Summer Institute 
 Membership
 Find a Chapter 
 Join or Renew 
 My AHS Login 
 Contact Us 
 © 2026 American Harp Society
PO Box 47, Granby, MA 01033
-->
 × 
 Search
 Close 
