
=== PAGINA 1 ===
How Do People React to Income-Based Fines?
Evidence from Speeding Tickets Discontinuities∗
Martti Kaila
University of Glasgow
June 2, 2026
Abstract
This paper studies the impact of income-based criminal punishments on crime. In
Finland, speeding tickets become income-dependent if the driver’s speed exceeds the
speeding limit by more than 20 km/h, leading to a substantial jump in the size of
the speeding ticket. Contrary to predictions of a traditional Becker model, individuals
do not bunch below the fine hike. Instead, the speeding distributions are smooth at
the cutoff. However, I demonstrate that the size of the realized speeding ticket has
sizable, but short-lived, impacts on reoffending. I use a regression discontinuity design
to show that fines that are, on average, 200 euros larger decrease reoffending by 15
percent in the following six months. The drop in reoffending is driven by high-income
individuals facing the highest fine at the cutoff. I estimate that a fixed fine hike that
matches the current deterrence effect would raise the fine increase faced by the bottom
income quartile by about 300% at the cutoff, relative to the increase they face under the
current income-based schedule. My empirical results are consistent with an explanation
that people operate under information frictions. To illustrate this, I construct a Becker
model with misperception and learning that can explain all the empirical findings.
∗martti.kaila@glasgow.ac.uk marttikaila.com I am particularly thankful for Kristiina Huttunen, Emily
Nix, Roope Uusitalo, and Markus J¨antti, who have provided guidance, help, and inspiration for this project.
I thank Jennifer Doleac, Daniel Hauser, Randi Hjalmarsson, Ramin Izadi, Tuomas Kosonen, Dave Macdon-
ald, Tuomas Matikka, Teemu Pekkarinen, Tuomas Pekkarinen, Mikko Silliman, Christian Traxler, and Tuuli
Vanhapelto for helpful comments and discussions. In addition, I thank seminar participants at Aalto Uni-
versity, Bocconi University, CES IFO Labor Economics Conference, EALE Conference, Helsinki GSE Labor
and Public Economics Workshop, Criminological Seminar at the University of Helsinki, Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam, and University of Glasgow.

=== PAGINA 2 ===
1
Introduction
One of the primary roles of government is to deter people from committing actions that cause
harm to others. For example, since traffic accidents are the most common unnatural cause
of death globally (WHO, 2017), governments worldwide use speeding tickets to discourage
drivers from driving at speeds that pose a danger to others.
Such sanctions typically
increase with offense severity, consistent with standard economic theory (Becker, 1968). In
some countries, fines also scale with offenders’ incomes. Yet little is known about how these
income-based fines affect behavior across the income distribution.
This paper studies how income-based fines affect behavior, using high-quality register
data and a unique context where the magnitude of fines increases with a person’s income.
Specifically, in Finland, speeding tickets become income-dependent if the driver’s speed
exceeds the limit by more than 20 km/h. Fines are allowed to increase without an upper
limit at the cutoff. This policy means that high-income drivers have a substantial incentive
to slow and bunch below the income-based threshold, since failing to avoid the income-based
cutoff can be very expensive. For example, in 2019, the police assigned NHL ice hockey
player Rasmus Ristolainen an income-based speeding ticket equal to approximately 120,000
euros.1
The first key result of the paper is that individuals ignore the vast discontinuous jumps
in the severity of the punishment. This directly contradicts the seminal model of Becker
(1968), which predicts that people should react to discontinuities in the price of speeding at
the 20 km/h cutoff by slowing down and bunching just below the income-based fine cutoff.
Specifically, working with the police in Finland, I obtained detailed police speeding ticket
data which I link to administrative tax data. Using this data, I find zero excess mass below
the income-based fine cutoff in the speeding distributions. Surprisingly, even high-income
drivers fail to bunch below the cutoff, even though they face a considerable incentive to
avoid the income-based fine.
The rest of the paper focuses on understanding why people ignore this stark discontinuity
in punishments and the broader implications of an income-based versus fixed fine system. I
propose two potential explanations that could attenuate individuals’ reactions to incentives,
both of which have been previously applied in other non-crime contexts (Chetty, 2012;
Kleven and Waseem, 2013). First, I examine the possibility of information frictions: drivers
are unaware of the system’s details, leading to suboptimal speed decisions around the cutoff.
Second, I consider the possibility of adjustment costs that cause individuals not to react to
1Finnish and international media frequently cover the Finnish income-based fine system. See, for example,
articles by The New York Times and The Atlantic.
1

=== PAGINA 3 ===
the cutoff. The adjustment costs explanation posits that individuals operate under perfect
information but neglect the cutoff since optimization is mentally too costly relative to the
expected punishment.
Both of these possible frictions can generate smooth speed distributions around the
discontinuity ex-ante, but the two friction types imply very different predictions on how
realized fines should affect recidivism ex-post. If individuals react to a realized fine, then
this reaction suggests imperfect information, with individuals learning from the punishment.
In contrast, under the adjustment cost story, the experienced fine should not change an
individual’s behavior since the ticket is just a realization of a rational bet.
The second main result of the paper is that people do react to the severity of realized
punishments ex-post. Since the speeding distributions are continuous at the cutoff, I use a
regression discontinuity design (RDD) to study how larger realized fines, due to the income-
based system, affect reoffending. According to my RDD estimates, individuals assigned
larger fines due to the income-based fine system are less likely to commit another traffic
offense in the short term.
The impact of larger fines on reoffending peaks around 4-8
months after the income-based fine. Those assigned, on average, a 200 euro larger fine
are approximately 2-3 percentage points less likely to commit another traffic crime in the
following 4-8 months. Compared to the average speeding behavior of the speeders who
receive a smaller fixed fine, this estimate implies a 15-20 percent reduction in recidivism.
In addition, reoffenders’ speeding distributions evolve smoothly at the income-based fine
cutoff. Hence, larger fines trigger an extensive margin response.
The RDD results lead to two conclusions. First, they suggest that individuals learn
from punishments, implying that information frictions at least partly cause the smooth
distribution around the discontinuity. Second, this learning response results in less speeding
in the short term after fines are realized, but the fine hikes do not provide deterrence ex-ante.
Importantly, the specific deterrence response is sharply heterogeneous by income. I show
that high-income individuals receiving larger fines at the income-based cutoff are less likely
to reoffend in the short term than low-income individuals receiving smaller fines. To do this,
I study how the RDD estimates differ by income quartiles. The fine jumps by around € 50
(500) in the bottom (top) income category. For cumulative reoffending over six months, the
point estimate is close to zero (0.1 pp.) for the bottom quartile, while in the top quartile
the point estimate of -4.5 pp. is double the main estimate. In addition, the different income
quartile groups respond similarly to small fixed-fine jumps. This suggests that high-income
individuals’ stronger reaction to larger fines is mainly because of the larger fines and not
because low- and high-income drivers differ on some other dimension.
2

=== PAGINA 4 ===
Lastly, my RDD results suggest that the impact of the larger fine on recidivism fades
out over time. The effect of larger fines becomes statistically insignificant 12 months after
the initial speeding incident. This result suggests that despite the heftier fines leading to a
substantial short-term learning reaction, drivers may forget in the long run.
What model could simultaneously explain smooth speeding distributions, reactions to
realized fines, and possible long-run fade-out in the effect of fines? To rationalize these
findings, I construct a Becker model with misspecification and learning to capture drivers’
behavior. The model builds on the idea that if individuals find pricing schemes too complex
to understand, they may use the so-called ”ironing” heuristic, where people approximate
marginal prices with average prices (Rees-Jones and Taubinsky, 2019). Drawing from this
insight, I assume that drivers find the actual penalty function too complex. Therefore, they
make speeding decisions using a rule of thumb that the speeding ticket increases linearly with
speed. Based on their speed, drivers may receive a fine. If the fine is larger than predicted,
they conclude that the relationship between speed and fine is steeper than expected and
update their beliefs accordingly.
I show that this Becker model with misperception and learning rationalizes all my em-
pirical findings. First, the ”ironing” heuristic causes drivers to ignore the fine discontinuity,
leading to a smooth speeding distribution. Second, due to the jump in the true penalty
function, drivers may receive larger fines than they expected. This steepens their linearized
penalty function and reduces speeding in the next period. Furthermore, the larger the true
discontinuity in the fine, the more significant the driver’s reaction ex-post. Finally, I show
that when individuals learn with the misspecified model, there are drivers whose beliefs and
actions do not converge but follow cycles.2 This is consistent with the fade-out over time
in the impact of receiving a larger-than-expected fine at the discontinuity.
In the third and final main empirical result, I use my heterogeneous treatment-effect
estimates to quantify the distributional consequences of replacing income-based fines with
a fixed fine increase that holds reoffending constant at the 20 km/h cutoff. The implied
safety-neutral increase is €215. Although the size is close to the average observed increase
(€204), the fixed fine reallocates penalties sharply across the income distribution. Bottom-
quartile drivers would face an increase of €215, up from €52 under the current system, while
top-quartile drivers would see their increase fall from €499 to €215. In levels, the implied
fixed fine above the cutoff would amount to 40% of monthly net income for bottom-quartile
drivers, compared with about 25% under the current income-based system.
This paper provides new evidence on how income-based fines shape deterrence and the
2An extensive theoretical literature studies learning when an individual’s model is misspecified (See, for
example, Berk (1966), Bohren and Hauser (2021), Esponda and Pouzo (2016), or Nyarko (1991)).
3

=== PAGINA 5 ===
incidence of monetary sanctions across the income distribution. First, I show that income-
based fines do not generate a deterrence response at the 20 km/h cutoff, despite large
financial incentives to slow down. This speaks to the literature on general deterrence, which
examines how the threat of punishment discourages crime in the general public, a central
question in the economics of crime. Economic theory predicts that harsher punishments
should deter crime, but the evidence is mixed (Chalfin and McCrary, 2017).
Lee and
McCrary (2017) find little behavioral response to the sharp increase in punishment severity
at age 18. In contrast, Traxler et al. (2018) show clear evidence of bunching below speeding
fine notches in Germany, where the fine schedule is stable and identical across drivers.
The contrast between my findings and those of Traxler et al. (2018) underscores the im-
portance of institutional context. Individuals may react strongly to simple and predictable
incentives but ignore large ones when the structure is complex or not salient. This dis-
tinction matters for policy design. If individuals misperceive or fail to understand complex
sanctioning rules, as my results suggest, then policy effectiveness may depend less on the
size of penalties and more on their salience and comprehensibility.3
Second, I show that income-based fines reduce reoffending, with the strongest responses
among high-income drivers who face the largest fine increases. This finding contributes to
the literature on specific deterrence effects of punishment, which examines how experiencing
punishment deters individuals (Gehrsitz, 2017; Hansen, 2015; Finlay et al., 2023; Drago
et al., 2009).4 My paper is most closely related to Duˇsek and Traxler (2022) and Goncalves
and Mello (2023).5 Duˇsek and Traxler (2022) find that speeding tickets reduce reoffending
at an extensive margin (no ticket vs.
ticket) but not at an intensive margin (low vs.
high ticket). In contrast, Goncalves and Mello (2023) observe that a speeding ticket hike
decreases future speeding at the intensive margin. I extend this evidence by showing that the
behavioral response scales sharply with fine size across income groups. High-income drivers
are also more likely to speed and reoffend, suggesting that income-based fines concentrate
behavioral change among individuals with higher baseline risk.
Combining these results, I quantify the distributional consequences of replacing income-
based fines with a safety-neutral fixed fine, thereby providing a direct, policy-relevant com-
parison of the two systems while holding reoffending constant. A safety-neutral fixed fine
3Prior work highlights the importance of speed limits and enforcement for traffic safety (Bauernschuster
and Rekers, 2022; DeAngelo and Hansen, 2014; van Benthem, 2015).
4The term ”specific deterrence” is more common in criminology (Doleac, 2017), while economists typically
frame such behavior as information updating (Chalfin and McCrary, 2017). Identifying specific deterrence
effects is difficult, as punishments may influence recidivism through alternative channels, such as peer effects.
Studies of incarceration often capture multiple mechanisms, making results context-dependent. For example,
Aizer and Doyle (2015) and Mueller-Smith (2014) find that incarceration increases recidivism, whereas
Bhuller et al. (2020) and Rose and Shem-Tov (2021) find the opposite.
5Other notable papers that study learning in the context of crime and law enforcement are by Banerjee
et al. (2019), Philippe (2022), Rincke and Traxler (2011), Drago et al. (2020), and Lochner (2007).
4

=== PAGINA 6 ===
would be substantially more regressive, shifting a larger share of the financial burden to-
ward low-income drivers, who are more likely to experience financial hardship from fines
(Mello, 2024). Because a fixed fine would sharply reduce penalties for high-income drivers
while pushing penalties for low-income drivers further into the range in which fine collection
rates may decline (Norris and Rose, 2024), moving to a fixed-fine cutoff could also reduce
government revenue.
Finally, my paper also relates to the literature studying individuals’ reactions to discon-
tinuities in the choice sets and the role of optimization frictions (for a review, see Kleven
(2016)). A common finding is that discontinuities, for example, in tax rates, produce ev-
ident bunching responses (Bastani and Selin, 2014; Chetty et al., 2011, 2013; Kleven and
Waseem, 2013; Harju et al., 2019). However, these bunching reactions often translate into
small elasticities due to optimization frictions. I contribute to this literature by document-
ing that people may completely ignore substantial price jumps due to information friction
but learn from price signals. This evidence is consistent with the findings in other contexts
that people do not use marginal prices in decision-making (Rees-Jones and Taubinsky, 2019;
Kostøl and Myhre, 2021; Ito, 2014).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides institutional
details and describes the data. Section 3 shows the speeding distribution. Section 4 inves-
tigates whether the size of the speeding ticket impacts recidivism. Section 5 introduces a
framework that seeks to rationalize my findings. Section 6 uses the heterogeneous treatment-
effect estimates to quantify the distributional implications of the safety-neutral fixed fine
across the income distribution. Section 7 concludes.
2
Institutional Setting and Data
2.1
The Relationship Between Speed, Income, and Speeding Tickets
Figure 1 gives an illustrative example of the speeding punishment schedule when the speed
limit is 100 km/h. Other possible speed limits are 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, and 120 km/h,
and the implications are similar. Given the 100 km/h limit and a 6 km/h grace speed, so
long as an individual drives at or below 107 km/h, there is no ticket given.
Two factors determine the size of the speeding ticket in Finland. First, if a speeding
violation is minor, i.e. only 7-20 km/h above the posted limit, then the individual receives
a fixed fine equal to € 140-200.
Second, if an individual’s speeding violation is more than 20 km/h over the limit, the
day-fine system kicks in, and speeding tickets become income-based. Under the income-
based fine system, the size of the fine is determined by the product of the offense severity
5

=== PAGINA 7 ===
and an individual’s income. Depending on the severity of the excess speeding, the individual
receives 1-120 fine units called day-fines. In cases of speeding, the higher the observed speed,
the more severe the offense, and hence the higher the number of day-fines the individual
receives. The following rule governs the monetary value of a single day-fine
I = Y −255
60
−3 × D,
(1)
where I is the monetary value of a single fine, Y is the net monthly income, and D is the
number of dependents.6
Finland introduced the income-based fine system in 1921 for two reasons. The first
motivation was equity. The government wanted to design a fine system that treated every-
one similarly, regardless of income. Second, the government was concerned that the high
inflation at the beginning of the 20th century would erode the deterrence effect of the fine
system. One way to overcome this problem was to link the value of fines to income. The
name ”day-fine system” originates from the feature that the value of a single day-fine was
initially set to be equal to the amount of salary a worker would lose if he had to spend one
day in prison instead of working. (HE, 1920)7
Figure 1(a) provides a theoretical example of how the size of the fine changes at the
income-based fine cutoff for different income quartiles.8 The fixed fine amount is identical
across all income groups and applies for 6-20 km/h above the speed limit. Once the speed
exceeds the limit by 20 km/h, the income-based fine system takes effect, and the ticket size
can jump substantially, depending on the driver’s income. For the top income quartile, the
fine jumps by around 400 euros at the cutoff. In contrast, for the bottom quartile, the fine
does not change at the cutoff. Although Figure 1(a) illustrates the system using discrete
income groups, in practice, the income-based fine schedule produces a continuum of discrete
jumps.
To illustrate the relative magnitude of fines across income groups, Figure 1(b) relates
the fine size to an individual’s net monthly income. Before the income-based fine cutoff,
lower-income individuals pay a larger share of their income as fines. However, after the
income-based fine threshold, the fine equals around 15-20 percent of net monthly income
for each income group, except for the lowest income group. In this sense, the income-based
fine system may be viewed as more equitable, as it imposes fines representing a similar share
6Net income consists of the sum of all taxable earned income, capital income, employee benefits, pensions,
and most social benefits. Police always calculate the fine based solely on the driver’s income. The income
of the driver’s family members does not affect the fine.
7The day-fine system is used in courts as well.
8The quartile-specific income stated in the figure is the average net income over the years 2015-2017
calculated using microdata.
6

=== PAGINA 8 ===
Figure 1: Relationship Between Income and the Size of Speeding Ticket
(a) Theoretical example when the speeding limit is 100 km/h
Size of the Fine in €: 
𝑆∙𝑦−255
60
−3 ∙𝐷
(b) Size of the Fine w.r.t. Monthly Net Income
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
.25
Fine relative to Monthly Income
106
108
110
112
114
116
118
120
122
124
126
128
130
Speed Km/h
1st Income Quartile (1105  Eur)
2nd Income Quartile (1937 Eur)
3rd Income Quartile (2505 Eur)
4th Income Quartile (4062 Eur)
Notes: Figure Panel a shows the theoretical relationship between the size of the speeding ticket, speed,
and net income for different income quartile groups when the speeding limit is 100. Figure Panel b relates
the speeding ticket’s size to the quartile’s average net income. Average net incomes within quartiles are
calculated using microdata. In the equation on top of the figure, S refers to a number of income-based fine
units, y to net monthly income, and D to a number of dependents. The example presented in the figure
assumes that the number of dependents is zero.
7

=== PAGINA 9 ===
of income across income groups.
Individuals just on the right-hand side of the income-based fine cutoff usually receive
around 10-12 income-based fine units. After the cutoff, the number of income-based fine
units increases in a stepwise manner. Appendix Table B.1 provides the exact punishment
schedules that the police use in Finland to punish speeding.
Two additional aspects of the system are essential to this study. First, the income-based
ticket cannot be lower than the fixed fine equal to 200 euros.9 Second, the income-based
speeding ticket schedule does not have an upper limit in euros. This has resulted in some
extraordinarily large speeding tickets, with some of the largest tickets in the past equalling
around 100,000-120,000 euros. The current unofficial record holder is professional National
Hockey League player Rasmus Ristolainen, who was fined € 120,680 in 2019 for speeding.
2.2
Speeding surveillance
Speeding is monitored in two ways in Finland.
First, the police use fixed surveillance
stations or automatic traffic surveillance vehicles that measure the speeds of passing cars.
If the surveillance station observes a speeding car, it takes a picture that the police use
to assign a fine. Second, traditional police patrols monitor speeding with radar and laser
speed guns. When a patrol observes a driver that exceeds the speeding limit, they may stop
the car and issue a notice or fine to the driver. I use only data created by the cameras,
since their measurements are not affected by decisions such as whom they should stop.10
Appendix Figure A.3 presents a picture of a typical police speeding surveillance camera.
After the surveillance machine has taken a picture, it is sent to the Police Traffic Safety
Center, where an officer identifies the car owner based on the registration number. Next,
the police adjust the speed downward due to measurement error and then decide, based on
the adjusted speed, whether to issue a notice or fine to an individual.11. All the numbers
I report in this paper are adjusted speeds. Finally, if the police assign a fine or notice, the
owner receives an electronic message and letter at home by post within 30 days from the
date of the offense. The message notifies the individual of the fine and its size.12
The police calculate income-based fines using an individual’s income from the most
recent tax decision. Family members’ incomes do not affect the fine size. If an individual’s
income has changed, it can be adjusted to reflect more recent information. I do not observe
9The fine stays constant at the cutoff for a person whose net income is around 1455 euros per month. If
an individual earns less than this, the fine does not change at the cutoff.
10For example, Goncalves and Mello (2021) provides evidence that in Florida, U.S officers discriminate
against minorities by not discounting their speed, which leads to larger fines for minority groups.
11The correction is 3 km/h if the speed is less than 100 km/h and 3% if the speed is larger than 100 km/h
12The police always send the ticket to the owner of the car. The owner must request an administrative
review if the owner was not the driver when the speeding incident occurred.
8

=== PAGINA 10 ===
individuals’ monthly earnings at the time of a speeding incident. Instead, I proxy monthly
earnings using annual net income, which may introduce modest measurement error.
Frequent speeding or extreme speeding can also lead to a temporary suspension of an
individual’s driver’s license. Three speeding tickets within a year or at least four tickets
within two years lead to a driving suspension lasting between 6-18 weeks. However, the
suspension policy does not change at the income-based fine cutoff, which makes it easier to
interpret the regression discontinuity design estimates I will estimate and describe. Further,
police may suspend an individual’s driver’s license for 1-6 months if the individual’s speed
exceeds the speeding limit of more than 35 km/h.
2.3
Data
Data sources
My primary data set comes from the National Police Board of Finland
and includes all the speeding tickets that the police gave between April 2018 and May 2020
(National Police Board of Finland, 2020).13 The police data contains rich information such
as the recorded speed, the speeding event’s location, the prevailing speed limit, and whether
an officer or an automatic camera system measured the speed. The data also include the
monetary value of fixed fines, the value of a single day-fine, and the number of day-fines
assigned.
A key component of the police data is that each speeding ticket in the data includes
a unique personal identifier, which I use to link the police speeding data to other admin-
istrative registers. First, I merge the speeding data into Statistics Finland’s crime report
register, which spans between 2006-2020 (Statistics Finland, 2022a). The crime report data
contains the same speeding events as the police speeding data, but it does not include in-
formation about the exact speed. Thus, I cannot use it to plot speeding distributions, but I
can construct the recidivism outcomes using this data. This approach increases my sample
size.14
Further, I merge the speeding data into Statistics Finland’s FOLK data module, which
contains a full population of Finnish residents between 1987-2019.
From this data set
(Statistics Finland, 2022b), I observe individual’s labor market outcomes such as labor
earnings, income, and employment, and basic demographics like age, municipality of resi-
dence, marital status, and whether a household owns a car.
To investigate the impacts on accidents (Statistics Finland, 2023), I use traffic acci-
dent data from Statistics Finland, which covers police-reported accidents between 1989 -
13Due to a reform, I do not observe fixed fines after May 2020.
14With this approach, I can use observations from the beginning of my sample period for which I would
not observe any pre-outcomes without the crime report data
9

=== PAGINA 11 ===
2022. The dataset includes information on the parties involved, the number of injuries, the
date of the accident, and the municipality in which it occurred. Importantly, it contains
unique personal identifiers that allow me to link individuals involved in accidents to other
administrative records.
I also conduct analysis using traffic data collected by the Finnish Transport Agency using
automatic traffic monitoring system (TMS) stations (Fintraffic, 2020). There are around 500
TMS stations scattered around Finland. These TMS stations observe if a vehicle passes the
station and record information such as time, speed of the vehicle, and vehicle class. Using
the data collected by TMS, I can plot the speed distribution of all drivers, not just those
caught speeding by cameras. Unfortunately, TMS data is anonymous. Hence, I cannot
observe information on the identity of the driver.
Sample Restrictions The first restriction I impose is that I only focus on speeding
incidents measured by automatic cameras. I ignore police patrol speeding data because prior
evidence shows that police officers may manipulate the observed speed, complicating the
interpretation of possible bunching (Goncalves and Mello, 2023). Second, I omit speeding
tickets given in areas where the limit is 120 km/h since there are too few observations.
Finally, I only take individuals whose personal identifier numbers are available in the police
data and who are at least 18 years old at the time of the speeding ticket.15
Outcome Variables In the second part of the paper, I study whether the size of the fine
impacts recidivism. For this analysis, I use police crime report data to follow individuals for
12 months after the initial speeding ticket and calculate a cumulative reoffending probability
for each month. I measure reoffending by constructing an indicator variable that takes the
value one if an individual has committed a new traffic crime in the current month or any
past months subsequent to the initial speeding ticket.16
I am able to follow the same
individuals for five months, but after 6 months my sample starts to decrease. However,
in the robustness section, I show that my results are insensitive to this limitation. I also
use crime report data to build variables measuring non-traffic criminal activity. Like the
primary outcome, the non-traffic crime indicator takes the value of one if an individual
has committed a non-traffic crime 1-12 months after the initial speeding ticket. Finally, I
examine whether the magnitude of the fine affects the probability of being involved in a
traffic accident as a driver within six months of receiving a speeding ticket.
Background Variables. Finnish register data contain a rich set of background vari-
ables such as an individual’s gender, education level, age, and employment status. I use
these variables to check the validity of the setting, as control variables, and to perform
15Personal identifiers are missing for foreigners who do not live in Finland permanently.
16Appendix Figure A.17 shows that I obtain similar results if the outcome is just speeding.
10

=== PAGINA 12 ===
Figure 2: The Relationship between Income, Probability of Speeding, and Crime Report
0
.1
.2
.3
P(Crime report) between Jan. 2018 - May 2020
0
20
40
60
80
100
Income Percentile Based on Income between 2013-2017
All Speeding Tickets
Fixed Speeding Tickets 
Income-based Speeding Tickets 
Not Traffic Crime
Notes: The figure presents the relationship between income percentile and the probability that an individual
appears in police crime report records between January 2018 and May 2020. The sample includes individuals
from birth cohorts 1953 to 1998. Income percentiles are calculated by comparing each individual’s mean
income over 2013–2017 with that of others in the same birth cohort. The analysis is restricted to individuals
residing in households with a car. Blue dots with circles indicate the share of individuals in each percentile
receiving a speeding ticket between January 2018 and May 2020.
Red diamonds indicate the share of
individuals appearing in police crime report records for suspected crimes other than traffic offenses during
the same period. Small dots and grey squares further decompose the speeding ticket averages into the shares
attributable to fixed fines (blue) and income-based fines (grey). Appendix Figure A.6 reports the average
earnings within each percentile. Appendix Figures A.5 and A.7 demonstrate the robustness of the results
across multiple specifications.
heterogeneity analysis. The most important variable is the net yearly income, which I use
to approximate an individual’s net monthly income at the time of the speeding incident.17
Descriptive Statistics Table 1 provides descriptive statistics of the background vari-
ables. Column 1 reports the means of all background variables in the sample that I obtain
after imposing the restrictions described above. Column 2 reports the same statistics but
in the small window around the income-based fine cutoff. On average, the individuals in
my sample are more likely to be male, older, and have high net income.18
To give an idea of how common speeding tickets are and who receives fines, Figure 2
plots a relationship between crime and income among the Finnish adult population with
a car.
The figure reveals two interesting patterns.
First, speeding is a common crime.
Around 15 percent of individuals in the median income percentile have received a speeding
ticket over a two-and-a-half-year follow-up period. By contrast, when the suspected offense
is not a traffic crime, only around 2 percent of the median-income individuals show up in
the police crime report data. Second, the association between an individual’s income and
speeding tickets differs substantially from the relationship between income and non-traffic
17For those who receive income-based fines, I can calculate their monthly net income from the income-
based fine. Appendix Figure A.4 illustrates that these two measures are highly correlated.
18I find that the average net income of individuals who are at least 18 years old is approximately € 2,000
in 2018.
11

=== PAGINA 13 ===
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics and Balance Check
All
Window +-3
RDD
CCT RDD
Mean
Mean
RDD
RDD
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Traffic offence, months t-1 to t-6
0.122
0.134
0.014
0.018
(0.011)
(0.013)
Non-Traffic offence, months t-1 to t-6
0.014
0.018
-0.002
-0.003
(0.004)
(0.005)
Employed
0.706
0.708
0.002
0.004
(0.013)
(0.016)
Unemployed
0.032
0.037
0.016
0.019
(0.006)
(0.007)
Outside the Labor Force
0.262
0.255
-0.019
-0.024
(0.012)
(0.015)
Monthly Net Income
2,590
2,572
-77.374
-75.269
(42.134)
(52.966)
Primary Education
0.164
0.168
0.003
0.007
(0.011)
(0.013)
Secondary Education
0.434
0.442
0.002
0.006
(0.013)
(0.016)
Tertiary Education
0.402
0.391
-0.005
-0.008
(0.014)
(0.018)
Female
0.331
0.298
-0.002
-0.001
(0.011)
(0.014)
Age
47.296
45.926
-0.947
-0.895
(0.432)
(0.536)
N of Children
0.834
0.847
0.062
0.081
(0.037)
(0.046)
Finnish Speaking
0.886
0.884
0.021
0.024
(0.010)
(0.012)
Married
0.501
0.481
0.000
0.006
(0.014)
(0.017)
Urban Municipality
0.729
0.716
0.014
0.021
(0.013)
(0.016)
Semi-urban Municipality
0.160
0.166
-0.015
-0.017
(0.009)
(0.012)
Rural municipality
0.111
0.118
-0.002
-0.007
(0.010)
(0.013)
Capital region
0.338
0.307
-0.003
0.002
(0.012)
(0.016)
Observations
338,191
23,026
Notes: The table shows the means of predetermined characteristics among individuals in the speeding ticket
sample and results from balance checks. Column (1) shows the means of background variables in the estimation
sample. Column (2) presents the means of background variables in the estimation sample after restricting
individuals within +-3 km/h from the income-based cutoff. Column (3) shows results from the balance check
where the dependent variable is a predetermined characteristic. The column reports the estimates of β obtained
using the equation 2. Column (4) reports results from the balance check conducted using the approach of
Calonico et al. (2014a). I cluster standard errors at the individual level. I omit speed limit zones of 80 km/h
and 120 km/h. See Section 2.3 for more details on sample construction.
12

=== PAGINA 14 ===
crimes. Higher-income individuals are much more likely to receive a speeding ticket than
lower-income individuals.
This fact suggests that speeding is likely a luxury crime.
In
contrast, there is a strong negative gradient between income and non-traffic crimes.19
In addition, Figure 2 decomposes the speeding tickets into fixed fines (small blue dots)
and income-based fines (small grey squares). The decomposition shows that the income
gradient is much steeper among fixed fines than income-based fines. The disparity in the
speeding probability by income is consistent with the idea that if individuals are risk-averse,
fixed fines deter low-income people more than high-income people. Of course, other things
may contribute to the gap. For example, wealthy individuals may drive more.
3
Do People Bunch at the Income-based Fine Cutoffs?
This section tests whether the income-based fine cutoff deters excessive speeding through
general deterrence. A simple Becker model, in which individuals compare gains from speed-
ing against expected punishment, predicts that drivers should react to a jump in the threat
at the cutoff by bunching. In the model, the cutoff makes speeds above it discontinuously
more expensive, implying that some drivers should respond by slowing down and bunch-
ing below the threshold.20 If this prediction holds, we should see excess mass below the
income-based fine cutoff in the speeding distribution.21
Speeding Distributions in Traffic Data I begin by plotting the speed distributions
in the Finnish Transport Infrastructure Agency’s (FTIA) traffic data. The automatic traffic
monitoring stations scattered around Finland generate the data. These stations measure
the speed of each passing car. The data allows me to see the total speed distribution, not
only the speed distributions conditional on a driver going faster than the posted speed limit.
Figure 3 shows the first key result of the paper. The figure plots total speed distributions
in the FTIA data. Figure Panel 3(a) plots the raw distributions in different speed limit
zones. Figure Panel 3(b) pools together all speed limit zones and normalizes the x-axis
variable as a distance from the income-based fine cutoff. The figures reveal two interesting
patterns. First, each speed distribution peaks around the speed limit, suggesting that, on
average, speed limits do strongly shape drivers’ behavior.
Second, even though the speed distributions peak at the posted speed limits, Figure 3(b)
shows that speed distributions exhibit no bunching around the points where the police’s
19Appendix Figures A.5 and A.7 show that the results are robust to multiple alternative ways to construct
income percentiles.
20Section 5 presents this result using a formal model.
21A common phenomenon in various contexts is that people react to discontinuous changes in incentives
by bunching. Examples of this behavior include studies by Kleven and Waseem (2013), Einav et al. (2019),
and Best et al. (2019)
13

=== PAGINA 15 ===
tolerance level (-14) ends, fixed fines increase (-5), or income-based fines turn on (0). The
fact that we do not see any mass just below these fine thresholds suggests that drivers do
not react to fine discontinuities as the simple Becker model would predict.
However, it is possible that high-income individuals react to fines, but the behavior
of drivers whose incentives change little at the cutoff masks the bunching by high-income
individuals. Unfortunately, the FTIA data does not contain information on the driver. To
overcome this shortcoming, next I move to use the police speeding data, which allows me
to observe each driver’s income.
Speeding Distributions in Police Data Figure 4 plots the speeding distributions
using the police speeding camera data.22 Figure 4(a) shows the distributions at different
speed limit zones. The figure illustrates that speed distributions evolve strikingly smoothly.
In other words, drivers do not bunch below the speeding ticket hikes highlighted by vertical
lines, despite significant incentives to do so.
In Figure 4(b), I plot the pooled and normalized speeding distributions for the income
quartile groups, which I define using predetermined income. Light (dark) blue dots show
the speeding distribution for the top (bottom) income quartile group. We see that even the
top income quartile’s speeding distribution evolves smoothly at the cutoff, although they
have the largest incentives to bunch below the threshold. Overall, my findings suggest that
the discontinuous increase in fines induced by the income-based system does not generate
general deterrence effects at the cutoff.
It is worth emphasizing that drivers may face different incentives at traffic monitoring
stations compared to camera sites, as the former generally lack cameras.
Nonetheless,
the probability of enforcement remains positive at the stations due to traditional police
crackdowns. Thus, while incentives to bunch may be weaker outside camera regions, we
would expect to see bunching in a frictionless world.
Figure 4(a) shows that we observe some excess mass at speed 96 km/h when the speed
limit is 80 km/h.
However, this spike is unlikely to arise from the driver’s behavioral
response. The mass point is just after a fixed fine hike, implying that people do not bunch
to avoid larger fines.
One explanation for the lack of bunching is that individuals know the locations of police
surveillance stations and slow down just before cameras to avoid speeding tickets. If this is
the case, the speeding ticket sample contains individuals who either do not care about the
cameras or do not know their location. However, the fact that the total speed distributions
shown by Figure 3 behave continuously everywhere suggests that the smoothness of the
22The police assign a fine only if the driver’s speed crosses the police’s tolerance level. This means that
the speed ticket data reveals the speed distribution’s right tail.
14

=== PAGINA 16 ===
Figure 3: The Speed Distributions in Traffic Data
(a) Raw Speed Distributions
81 km/h
101 km/h
121 km/h
141 km/h
0
.02
.04
.06
.08
Density
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Speed (km/h)
Limit: 60 km/h 
Limit: 80 km/h
Limit: 100 km/h
Limit: 120 km/h
(b) Pooled Speed Distribution
0
1000000
2000000
3000000
Number of observations
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Distance from the day fine cutoff
Notes:
The figure presents the speed ticket distribution in the data created by the Finnish Transport
Agency’s automatic traffic monitoring stations. Figure panel (a) shows the speed distributions separately in
different speed limit zones. Figure panel (b) pools all speed distributions together and normalizes the x-axis
variable as a distance from the income-based fine cutoff.
15

=== PAGINA 17 ===
Figure 4: The Speeding Distributions in Police Camera Data
(a) Speeding Distributions
51 km/h
61 km/h
71 km/h
81 km/h
91 km/h
101 km/h
0
10
20
30
40
Number of observations (thousands)
40
60
80
100
120
140
Speed (km/h)
Speed limit 30
Speed limit 40
Speed limit 50
Speed limit 60
Speed limit 70
Speed limit 80
Speed limit 100
Speed limit 120
(b) Normalized Distributions for Income Quartile Groups (limit 80 km/h omitted)
0
5
10
15
20
Number of observations (thousands)
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
Normalized distance from the income-based fine cutoff (km/h)
Income Quartile 1
Income Quartile 2
Income Quartile 3
Income Quartile 4
Notes: The figure presents the speeding ticket distributions in the sample containing speeding tickets assigned
by cameras between Jan 2018 - May 2020. Figure Panel (a) shows the distributions in different speeding limit
areas. The x-axis refers to the speed in km/h, and the y-axis to the number of speeding tickets per km/h.
Vertical dashed lines indicate the points where the average speeding ticket jumps due to the income-based
fine system. Figure Panel (b) pools all the speeding limit zones except 80 km/h together, normalizes the
x-axis to measure the distance from the income-based fine cutoff, and plots the speeding distributions for
different income quartiles. I define income quartiles using an individual’s average net income 1-2 years before
the speeding incident. The first vertical line highlights the point at which the fine jumps a fixed amount.
The second vertical line highlights the point at which the income-based fine system kicks in.
16

=== PAGINA 18 ===
speeding distributions is not just an artifact of the police camera data.
To shed additional light on how cameras shape behavior, Appendix Figure A.21 presents
data from a location equipped with both a traffic monitoring station and a police camera.
While the speed distribution peaks sharply at the speed limit, it remains smooth around
the income-based fine cutoff, with no evidence of bunching.23
Starting from the next section, the rest of the paper tries to understand why people
ignore the cutoff.
4
Does a Larger Speeding Ticket Influence Re-offending?
The previous section documents that drivers do not behave as a simple Becker model pre-
dicts. Drivers ignore the discontinuous changes in the price of speeding at the income-based
fine cutoff ex-ante and do not bunch as this theory would predict. In other words, changes
in the threat of punishment at the cutoff do not have a general deterrent effect.
There are two possible explanations for the lack of bunching. First, drivers may fail to
bunch because of information frictions. In other words, people do not understand how the
system works, leading to suboptimal decisions. Second, people may operate under perfect
information but ignore the cutoff because of adjustment costs. To bunch, an individual
has to consider many things, such as the measurement error of a car’s speedometer, the
downward correction made by the police, and the exact location of the income-based cutoff.
Due to the complexity of the problem, individuals may feel that gains from bunching are
smaller than the adjustment costs, implying that they neglect the cutoff.
Although both information frictions and adjustment costs can generate smooth speed-
ing distributions, they make different predictions on how realized speeding tickets should
affect reoffending. If information frictions characterize an individual’s behavior, then as-
signed fines should reveal information about the punishment system and affect recidivism.
However, under adjustment costs, individuals should not react to fines since they already
operate with perfect information.
This section examines whether fines can still exert specific deterrence effects when gen-
eral deterrence effects are absent. Specifically, this section asks whether being assigned a
larger versus a smaller speeding ticket changes the driver’s behavior ex-post. To answer
this question, I use a regression discontinuity design to compare individuals just below and
above the cutoff. The smoothness suggests that drivers do not manipulate whether or not
they receive a large fine.
23Traffic monitoring stations generally lack cameras. However, I was able to identify one station that has
a camera: Station 145, located on Ring Road 1, which runs through Helsinki and Espoo.
17

=== PAGINA 19 ===
How individuals react to the size of the fine helps us understand how drivers make
speeding decisions. Adjustment costs will likely explain the lack of bunching if the assigned
speeding ticket size does not influence recidivism. However, if larger speeding tickets reduce
reoffending, then information frictions and learning characterize the individual’s behavior.
In Section 5, I will present a theoretical framework that rationalizes the empirical findings
presented in this and the previous section.
4.1
Empirical Specification
I investigate the impact of larger realized fines on recidivism using a sharp regression dis-
continuity design (RDD). My RDD equation takes the form
Yil,t = βtZil,0 + f(Sil,0) + f(Sil,0) × Zil,0 + αl,0 + ϵil,t,
(2)
where the dependent variable Yil,t measures the cumulative recidivism t months after the
initial speeding incident. The indicator variable Zil,0 equals 1 if an individual i crossed the
income-based fine cutoff in the speeding limit region l in period zero (normalized to be the
time of the speeding incident). The running variable Sil,0 controls the distance from the
fine cutoff. The interaction term f(Sil,0)×Zil,0 allows the relationship between the outcome
and the running variable to change at the cutoff. Further, I control for the speed limit fixed
effects αl,0. The error terms (ϵil,t) are clustered at the individual level. I use triangular
weights centered at income-based fine cutoffs, and select optimal bandwidth around the
cutoff using methods of Calonico et al. (2014b).
The coefficient of interest, βt, captures the specific deterrence effect of larger fines on
recidivism. Interpreting this estimate as causal requires that the potential outcome evolves
smoothly at the cutoff. If this identifying assumption holds, individuals at the cutoff are,
on average, similar but receive speeding tickets of very different magnitudes.
A threat to identification could be that fixed and income-based fines would differentially
affect the risk of license suspension or the size of future fines. However, as explained in
Section 2.1, fixed fines and income-based fines accumulate points similarly. Moreover, the
type of fine does not influence the size of future fines. Consequently, any discontinuity in
reoffending at the cutoff can be attributed solely to variation in monetary penalties, rather
than to differences in license suspension risk or the structure of future fines.24
Treatment Figure 5(a) clarifies the treatment for those who cross the income-based
fine cutoff. Black connected dots in the figure reveal that those on the right-hand side of
the cutoff (treatment group) receive a fine that is, on average, 200 euros larger than the
24Appendix Figure A.20 shows that about 20% of individuals received a speeding ticket in the previous
year. Since suspension requires three violations in 12 months, few are at immediate risk of license suspension.
18

=== PAGINA 20 ===
Figure 5: Graphical Evidence: Validity of the Setting
(a) Speeding Distribution and Size of the Fine
McCrary: -0.001 (0.001) 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Size of the fines (100 Euros)
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
Density
-14
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Normalized distance from the income-based fine cutoff (km/h)
Observations (left)
Size of the Fine (Right)
(b) Covariate Balance
Fixed fine cutoff
Income-based fine cutoff 
.05
.1
.15
.2
Summary Index of Covariates
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Normalized distance from the income-based fine cutoff (km/h)
Notes: The figure presents how speeding distribution (a), size of the fine (a), and predetermined background
characteristics (b) evolve at the income-based fine cutoff. The x-axis measures the distance from the income-
based fine cutoff in km/h. In Figure Panel (a), the left-hand side y-axis refers to the density per km/h,
and the right-hand side y-axis measures the average size of the speeding ticket. Figure Panel (b) plots a
summary index of predetermined covariates against normalized speed. The index is equal to the predicted
values I obtain by regressing the indicator variable, which takes value one if an individual commits another
traffic offense within six months after the speeding tickets against covariates listed in table 1. I only used
individuals who received a fixed fine to estimate the model. I use coefficients from this model to construct
the index for everyone in my sample. The sample constructed as the section 2.3 describes.
fine for those on the left-hand side of the cutoff (control group). However, the size of the
fine varies considerably with an individual’s income (see, Appendix Figure A.19).
Validity of the Setting I perform two types of tests to assess whether the identifying
assumption is satisfied. First, if people do not manipulate the running variable, the dis-
tribution of the running variable should be continuous. Figure 5(a) provides evidence that
this first prediction holds in my setting. Based on the figure, the number of observations
decreases rapidly with speed, but there is no evidence of excess mass below the cutoff. In
other words, I do not find evidence that individuals manipulate the speed perfectly.
Second, if potential outcomes evolve smoothly at the cutoff, individuals just below and
just above the cutoff should be similar in their observable characteristics on average. To
determine whether predetermined characteristics evolve smoothly at the cutoff, I investi-
gate whether a predicted probability of reoffending that I construct using predetermined
covariates jumps at the cutoff.25 The predicted probability is an index that summarizes all
background variables succinctly into one variable. I construct the index as follows. First,
I take individuals who received a fixed fine and regress a dummy variable for reoffending
on a set of predetermined variables, excluding speed. Then, I use regression coefficients to
calculate each individual’s predicted probability of reoffending.
Figure 5(b) illustrates that the index score behaves smoothly at the cutoff, providing
another piece of evidence supporting the key assumption of RDD. In addition, I study how
25Rose and Shem-Tov (2021) and Londo˜no-V´elez et al. (2020) conduct similar validity checks.
19

=== PAGINA 21 ===
individual variables behave at the cutoff. Columns (3) and (4) of Table 1 show that most
of the predetermined background variables behave continuously at the income-based fine
cutoff. Out of 18 variables tested, only three are statistically significant at a 5 percent level,
which is slightly more than one would expect to show up due to randomness. However,
these significant variables do not seem to be jointly related to the predicted probability of
committing traffic crimes, since the summary index of covariates evolves so smoothly in
Figure 5(b). Furthermore, in the robustness section 4.5, I show that the main estimates
barely move when I add these background characteristics as controls in the estimation.
4.2
The Impact of Speeding Ticket Size on Recidivism
Descriptive Evidence Figure 6 presents the first evidence of how people respond to larger
fines that arise from the income-based fine system. The x-axis of the figure measures the
distance from the income-based cutoff in km/h. The dots plot the probability of committing
another traffic offense within six months after a speeding ticket. We observe sharp drops in
the probability of reoffending at the cutoffs where the fines jump discontinuously. The drop
is large at the income-based fine cutoff, but we also see some action at the fixed fine cutoff.
Before and after the fine cutoffs, the probability of reoffending evolves smoothly. Under the
key assumption I stated above, which seems plausible given the evidence, the discontinuous
jump in the fines causes the observed drops in the probability of reoffending. Next, I use
an RDD to quantify the size of the drop in reoffending at the income-based fine cutoff.26
RDD Estimates Figure 7 presents the second key result of the paper.
The figure
shows how the larger speeding tickets impact the probability of committing another traffic
offense in the future. In Figure 7(a), I graph the RDD estimates, i.e. the βts from equation
2.
These estimates capture the specific deterrence effect of a larger speeding ticket on
the cumulative reoffending probability. My main outcome tracks individuals’ cumulative
reoffending probabilities 1-12 months after a fine.27
Figure 7(a) shows that the short-term cumulative reoffending probability drops when
a driver receives a larger fine due to an income-based system. The impact peaks around
5-9 months after the speeding incident. At this time, drivers who received a larger fine are
around 2.1-2.9 percentage points less likely to commit another traffic offense than individuals
who received a fixed fine.28
26Appendix Figure A.26 shows the descriptive pattern after 3, 6, 9, and 12 months.
27I can follow the same sample for six months, after which the sample size starts to decrease. I show that
my results are robust to this limitation in Section 4.5.
28I exclude the 80 km/h limit zone from my main analysis. Despite the lack of incentives to do so, I
observe bunching at the speed of 96 km/h when the limit is 80 km/h. One explanation for this excess mass
point is an error in the data, so I do not use the limit zone in the main analysis. However, Appendix Figure
A.13 shows that I get similar results when I use all speed zones.
20

=== PAGINA 22 ===
Figure 6: Graphical Evidence: Recidivism Within 6 Months
Fixed fine cutoff
Income-based fine cutoff 
.05
.1
.15
.2
P(Traffic offence in 6 months after fines)
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Normalized distance from the income-based fine cutoff (km/h)
Notes: The figure presents a recidivism outcome as a function of normalized speed. The x-axis measures
the distance from the income-based fine cutoff in km/h. The y-axis refers to the probability of committing
another traffic offense within six months after the initial speeding ticket. Vertical lines highlight the fine
discontinuity points. The income-based (fixed) fine cutoff locates at 0 (-5). The sample is constructed as
the section 2.3 describes.
I also provide suggestive evidence that drivers do not react to larger realized fines by
bunching below the income-based fine cutoff.
Appendix Figure A.9 plots the speeding
distributions for individuals reoffending within a year. The figure shows that individuals
who received an income-based fine and reoffended do not bunch below the cutoff. These
results suggest that a larger speeding ticket triggers only an extensive margin response.
To understand the relative magnitudes of these estimates, Figure 7(b) plots cumulative
reoffending probabilities in the control group, and Figure 7(c) relates the point estimates
shown in Figure 7(a) to the reoffending probabilities in the control group. Reoffending is
common: of those who are just below the income-based fine cutoff, more than 20 percent
commit another traffic offense within a year. However, larger income-based fines decrease
recidivism in the short term. Figure 7(c) shows that those who receive an income-based
fine are around 15-20 percent less likely to commit another traffic offense in the following
6-8 months than individuals who receive a smaller fixed fine.
Lastly, Figure 7 provides some suggestive evidence that the decrease in speeding as a
result of a larger speeding ticket starts to fade out around nine months after the initial
ticket was assigned. Although the point estimate is still negative twelve months after the
initial speeding ticket, it is not statistically significant from zero at a 95% confidence level.
This result suggests that if the target of larger fines is to achieve a permanent reduction in
speeding, then fines must be assigned frequently to those who speed.29
29Appendix Figure A.23 replicates Figure 7, extending the follow-up period to 18 months. The point
21

=== PAGINA 23 ===
Figure 7: RDD Estimates at the Day Fine cutoff - 80 km/h limit omitted
(a) RDD Point Estimates
-.08
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
.02
RDD Estimate
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Months Since Speeding Ticket
95% Confidence Intervals
RDD Estimate
(b) The Mean of Outcome in Control Group
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
.25
Cumulative recidivism probability
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Months since speeding ticket
(c) The Relative Magnitude of Point Estimates
-.6
-.5
-.4
-.3
-.2
-.1
0
.1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Months since speeding ticket
Notes: Figure panel (a) plots the RDD estimates of βil,t obtained using Equation (2). Estimates plot the
impact of the higher fine on the cumulative probability of committing a traffic offense in t months after the
initial fine. The estimates are obtained using conventional local linear regression with a triangular kernel.
Vertical solid lines are the 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the individual
level. Panel (b) shows the mean of the outcome variable in the control group, and panel (c) relates the point
estimate shown by the connected dots in panel (a) to reoffending probabilities in the control group. Sample
construction and data as defined in section 2.3.
22

=== PAGINA 24 ===
Table 2: Regression Discontinuity Design Estimates
Dep. Variable: P(Traffic Offence between time 1 and t)
Time (t)
Mean
RDD
RDD
RDD
BW
Obs.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
1
0.028
-0.007
-0.008
-0.011
3
23,026
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.007)
2
0.056
-0.011
-0.011
-0.015
3
23,026
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.009)
3
0.078
-0.017
-0.018
-0.022
3
23,026
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.010)
4
0.102
-0.022
-0.023
-0.027
3
23,026
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.011)
5
0.120
-0.029
-0.030
-0.034
3
23,026
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.011)
6
0.137
-0.021
-0.022
-0.025
4
31,912
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.011)
7
0.155
-0.026
-0.026
-0.030
4
30,627
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.013)
8
0.173
-0.026
-0.026
-0.030
4
29,323
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.013)
9
0.192
-0.028
-0.030
-0.033
4
27,715
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.014)
10
0.207
-0.018
-0.019
-0.020
5
34,908
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.014)
11
0.224
-0.012
-0.012
-0.014
5
33,062
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.015)
12
0.242
-0.011
-0.012
-0.013
5
30,592
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.016)
Controls

CCT Estimator

Notes: The table shows the RDD estimates from the income-based cutoff displayed in
Figure 7. The analysis omits the limit zone 80 km/h. The outcome is the probability that
an individual commits another traffic offense 1 to t months after the initial speeding ticket.
Column (2) shows the mean of the outcome for those just on the left-hand side of the cutoff.
Column (3) presents the RDD estimates obtained using equation 2. Column (4) shows
results from a similar analysis but with controls. Column (5) reports biased corrected RDD
estimates obtained using the robust approach by Calonico et al. (2014b). Column (6) shows
the bandwidth selected using methods of Calonico et al. (2014b). Column (7) shows the
number of observations. In columns (3) and (4), standard errors in the parentheses are
clustered at the individual level. For bias-corrected estimates, the confidence intervals are
given by the approach of Calonico et al. (2014b). Sample construction and data as defined
in Section 2.3.
23

=== PAGINA 25 ===
The potential fade-out appears even more pronounced in Figure 7(c), which illustrates
the relative magnitude of the estimates. However, this pattern should be interpreted with
caution. One possible explanation is that crossing the income-based fine threshold results in
an immediate reduction in the treatment group’s probability of reoffending compared to the
control group. Thereafter, both groups accumulate offenses at a similar rate. This implies
that the RDD estimate could remain stable, although its magnitude declines relative to the
control group’s mean over time.
4.3
Does the Effect Vary by Income?
The results above indicate that larger speeding tickets, triggered by crossing the income-
based fine cutoff, lead to a reduction in reoffending. However, average effects may mask
important variation in the impacts of fines as the fine discontinuity varies substantially with
income. This raises two key questions: (1) Do high- and low-income drivers exhibit similar
behavioral responses to their respective fine increases? (2) Does the marginal deterrence
effect of fines differ by income? These questions are central to evaluating whether income-
based fines are both equitable and effective.
I address these questions in two steps. First, I examine the threshold-crossing effects
by income. Second, I estimate how the marginal effects of fines vary by income using an
instrumental variable design. I start by splitting my sample into quartiles using individuals’
annual net income two years before the ticketing year. Then, I estimate the effect separately
in each quartile group, first using equation 2, and then using the IV approach.
Jump in the Fine by Income
Figure 8(a) illustrates how the size of the fine develops
as a function of speed for different income quartile groups. We see that different income
quartiles experience very dissimilar speeding ticket hikes at the income-based fine cutoff.
The fine increases by around 500 euros for the top quartile, whereas the hike equals around
50 euros for the bottom quartile. For the bottom group (top group), the fixed fine equals
approximately 20 (4) percent of the net monthly income. In relative terms, the income-based
fine is similar across all income groups.
Descriptive Evidence by Income
Figure 9 plots reoffending probabilities around the
fine thresholds, disaggregated by income group. Each blue dot represents the share of drivers
who reoffend within six months of receiving a speeding ticket, plotted against driving speed,
separately by income quartile. Panel (d) shows a sharp decline in reoffending at the income-
estimates appear to converge toward zero by the end of the period, although they become increasingly
imprecise over time.
24

=== PAGINA 26 ===
Figure 8: Impact of Fines and Income Quartile
(a) Average Size of Fine
0
2
4
6
8
10
Size of the Fines (100 Euros)
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
Normalized distance from the income-based fine cutoff (km/h)
Monthly Net Income: 1,011.0 Euros  
Monthly Net Income: 1,951.1 Euros 
Monthly Net Income: 2,624.6 Euros 
Monthly Net Income: 4,745.5 Euros 
(b) RDD Estimates by Income (Income-Based Cutoff)
-.1
-.075
-.05
-.025
0
.025
.05
P(Traffic offence in 6 months after the ticket)
1
2
3
4
Income Quartile
(c) RDD Estimates by Income (Fixed Fine Cutoff)
-.1
-.075
-.05
-.025
0
.025
.05
P(Traffic offence in 6 months after the ticket)
1
2
3
4
Income Quartile
Notes: Figure Panel (a) shows a jump in the fine’s size at the income-based fine cutoff for different income
quartiles. The income quartiles are constructed using an individual’s annual net income measured 1-2 years
before the speeding incident. The legend in the left upper corner shows the approximated monthly income
obtained by dividing the individual’s annual net income by twelve. The x-axis measures the distance from
the income-based fine cutoff. Figure Panel (b) reports RDD estimates for different income quartiles at the
income-based fine cutoff. Figure Panel (c) restricts the sample to a fixed fine cutoff. The outcome is the
probability that an individual commits another traffic crime within six months after the original speeding
incident.
The estimates are obtained using equation 2.
The shaded bands show 95 percent confidence
intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. Sample construction defined in 2.3.
25

=== PAGINA 27 ===
based threshold for the top income group, which faces the steepest fine increase. In contrast,
lower-income groups exhibit a smaller decline in reoffending.
Figure 9 also clarifies why Figure 6 suggests that only individuals exactly at the cutoff
react to the fine’s size. Figure 9 shows that the entire reoffending curve to the right of
the cutoff shifts downward for the top income group. However, the strong heterogeneity by
income causes the averaged pattern in Figure 6 to suggest that only individuals exactly at
the cutoff respond to larger fines.30
Figure 9: Normalized Speed and Reoffending by Income Quartile
(a) Income Quartile 1
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
P(Traffic offence in 6 months after fines)
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Normalized distance from the income-based fine cutoff (km/h)
(b) Income Quartile 2
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
P(Traffic offence in 6 months after fines)
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Normalized distance from the income-based fine cutoff (km/h)
(c) Income Quartile 3
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
P(Traffic offence in 6 months after fines)
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Normalized distance from the income-based fine cutoff (km/h)
(d) Income Quartile 4
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
P(Traffic offence in 6 months after fines)
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Normalized distance from the income-based fine cutoff (km/h)
Notes: The figure presents a recidivism outcome as a function of normalized speed for different income
quartile groups.
The x-axis measures the distance from the income-based fine cutoff in km/h.
Income
quartiles are constructed using the mean disposable income 1-2 years before the speeding incident. The y-
axis refers to the probability of committing another traffic offense within six months after the initial speeding
ticket. Vertical lines highlight the fine discontinuity points. The income-based (fixed) fine cutoff locates at
0 (-5). The sample is constructed as the section 2.3 describes.
Threshold-crossing Effects by Income
Figures 8(b) and 8(c) then plot RDD estimates
for different income quartiles when the outcome is the cumulative reoffending probability
six months after the initial speeding ticket. Blue diamonds in Figure 8(b) show the RDD
30A nonlinear relationship between measured speed and reoffending can also explain why the effect in
Figure 6 appears localized. If this nonlinearity is strong around the cutoff, it may seem that only individuals
at the threshold are affected, even though the treatment impacts all those above it. Appendix Figure A.24
illustrates this with two counterfactual scenarios based on the RDD estimates: in Panel (a), the treatment
effect is constant; in Panel (b), it diminishes with observed speed.
26

=== PAGINA 28 ===
estimates for different income quartiles at the income-based fine cutoff. Although the esti-
mates are relatively imprecise, they suggest that high-income individuals react very strongly
to their fines. The point estimate is zero for the bottom quartile, after which the estimates
increase almost linearly. For the top income group, the RDD estimate (-0.045) is double
the size of the main estimate I presented in the previous section.
The black dots in the Figure 8(c) present similar RDD estimates as above but use
variation from the fixed fine cutoff where an individual’s income does not affect the size of
the fine.31 Even though the estimates are imprecise, the magnitudes are smaller and more
comparable between groups.
Together, these estimates suggest that individuals who receive larger fines are less likely
to recidivate than individuals who receive small fines.
Because all income groups react
similarly to fixed fine hikes, the sizable reaction to income-based fines by high-income people
is due to larger fines and not because they are different on some unobserved dimension that
impacts speeding behavior and is correlated with income.32
Instrumental Variable Estimates
The RDD estimates across income groups are chal-
lenging to compare as the fine size varies with income. Crossing the threshold increases
fines by € 50 for low-income drivers and by € 500 for high-income drivers. As a result,
treatment effects are not directly comparable across groups. To address this, I treat cross-
ing the income-based cutoff as an instrumental variable for the realized fine amount. This
approach allows me to estimate the marginal effect of a fine on recidivism.
In the instrumental variable (IV) analysis, my first stage equation is
Fil,0 = π0Zil,0 + f(Sil,0) + f(Sil,0) × Zil,0 + αl,0 + ϵil,0,
(3)
where Fil,0 stands for the fine size, Sil,0 controls for distance from the income-based
cutoff, Zil,0 takes value 1 if an individual crosses the income-based cutoff, αl,0 are limit
fixed effects, and ϵil,0 is the error term. The first stage coefficient π0 identifies the average
increase in fine size when crossing the income-based cutoff.
Reduced form regressions are equivalent to the main specification I present in equation
2. These estimates capture the effect of crossing the income-based cutoff on reoffending.
IV estimates equal the ratio between the reduced form coefficients and the first stage coef-
31Appendix Figure A.14 conducts the same analysis as the main Figure 7 but using variation from the
fixed fine cutoff (15 km/h), where the fine is independent of income. The jump in the fixed fine has a small
and imprecise effect on reoffending.
32Appendix Table B.12 examines how the estimates vary with recent income changes. The results suggest
that individuals with recent positive income growth exhibit a stronger response to the size of the realized
fine than those with negative income growth. This pattern is consistent with individuals failing to adjust
their expectations about fine amounts as their income increases prior to being fined.
27

=== PAGINA 29 ===
ficients. IV estimates capture how reoffending changes in response to a one-euro increase
in fines.33
The IV estimates have a causal interpretation under three assumptions. First, the in-
strument must be strongly correlated with the treatment.
Figure 5(a) shows that this
assumption holds. Second, the instrument must be independent of individuals’ potential
outcomes. This condition follows from the key RDD assumption that potential outcomes
evolve smoothly at the cutoff. Figure 5(b) provides supporting evidence that this assump-
tion is satisfied in my setting. Finally, the exclusion restriction requires that the instrument
can affect the outcome only through the treatment. This assumption would be violated, for
example, if crossing the cutoff would trigger extra license suspension points. However, as
explained in Section 4.1, this is not the case.
Table 3 reports the results from the instrumental variable (IV) analysis. Column (1)
reports results for the full sample, while columns (2)–(5) present results by income quartile,
defined based on predetermined net income. Panels A and B of Table 3 show the first
stage and reduced form estimates for the full sample and for each income quartile. Panel
C presents the IV estimates. For ease of interpretation, all IV coefficients are scaled by a
factor of 100. Column (1) indicates that a € 100 increase in the fine reduces reoffending by
approximately one percentage point.
Columns (2)–(5) of Table 3 report IV estimates separately by income quartile. The IV
estimate for the top income quartile (0.009), reported in column (5), is slightly smaller than
the full-sample estimate (0.011). In contrast, columns (3) and (4) show the largest marginal
effects for the two middle-income quartiles, although these estimates are imprecise. This
pattern also appears in the elasticities reported at the bottom of the table, which I calculate
as the ratio of the relative change in reoffending to the relative change in fine size.
In summary, the threshold-crossing effects and IV estimates offer important insights into
how income-based fines influence reoffending behavior. The reduced form effects indicate
that high-income individuals, who face the largest fines, reduce reoffending the most. Yet,
while high-income individuals exhibit the strongest response, the IV estimates suggest that
the marginal deterrence effects are largest for the middle-income groups, although the es-
timates are imprecise. Taken together, these findings suggest that income-based fines may
help reduce income-related disparities in speeding behavior, which I document in Figure
2. However, because marginal deterrent effects decline with income, fines for high-income
individuals must be sufficiently large to generate a comparable reduction in reoffending.
33I estimate the impact of fines on reoffending using the two-stage least squares (2SLS) approach that
gives the correct standard errors. In my setting, 2SLS estimates will equal the ratio between reduced form
and first stage coefficients.
28

=== PAGINA 30 ===
Table 3: Instrumental Variable Analysis
Income Quartile
All
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A: First Stage (Fines)
204.113
51.582
103.299
187.268
499.060
(7.427)
(1.790)
(2.850)
(4.807)
(28.539)
Panel B: Reduced Form (Reoffending within 6 months)
-0.022
0.001
-0.024
-0.028
-0.045
(0.009)
(0.020)
(0.018)
(0.016)
(0.018)
Panel C: IV (Reoffending within 6 months)
-0.011
0.002
-0.023
-0.015
-0.009
(0.005)
(0.038)
(0.018)
(0.009)
(0.004)
Controls





Control mean
0.137
0.163
0.132
0.101
0.150
Elasticity
-0.157
0.024
-0.352
-0.296
-0.120
Bandwidth
4
4
4
4
4
Observations
31,912
8,418
7,708
7,887
7,899
Notes: The table reports first stage, reduced form, and instrumental variable (IV) estimates
for the full sample and by income quartiles. Panel A presents first stage results from equation
3, where the outcome is the fine amount. Panel B reports reduced form coefficients from
equation 2, where the outcome is an indicator for committing any traffic offense within six
months after a speeding ticket. Panel C presents IV estimates using 2SLS with the same
outcome as in Panel B. Column (1) shows estimates for the full sample. Columns (2)–(5)
report results by income quartiles, defined using average net income over the two years
before the speeding incident.
Elasticities are calculated as the ratio of: (1) the reduced
form coefficient divided by the mean reoffending rate in the control group, and (2) the first
stage coefficient divided by the mean fine amount in the control group. IV estimates are
multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation.
All regressions include controls to improve
statistical precision. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. See Section 2.3 for
details on sample construction.
4.4
Additional Results
Appendix Figure A.22 illustrates how RDD results vary by prior speeding history. In the
Bayesian learning framework, individuals who have received more speeding tickets should
respond less to new information, as their priors are more precise. To test this, I estimate
the RDD separately for reoffenders (those who received at least one speeding ticket in the
preceding four years) and first-time offenders. Contrary to theoretical predictions, Appendix
Figure A.22(b) shows that reoffenders’ response to the fine hike is approximately three times
larger than that of first-time offenders.
However, the results should be interpreted with caution. As Appendix Table B.11 shows,
reoffenders and first-time offenders differ along several dimensions that may influence their
responsiveness to fines. Reflecting this, Appendix Figure A.22(c) shows that reoffenders
in the control group are substantially more likely to reoffend than first-time offenders.
Nonetheless, these results remain informative, as they suggest that specific deterrence effects
29

=== PAGINA 31 ===
are strongest among individuals most likely to engage in behavior that poses risks to others.
Another important question is whether specific deterrence effects vary with monitoring
intensity. When enforcement is absent, the fine size should have little impact, as individ-
uals face a negligible risk of detection. Conversely, when the probability of being caught
approaches one, most drivers are already deterred, making the fine amount less relevant.
This reasoning suggests that fines should exert the strongest deterrence effect at interme-
diate levels of monitoring.
To test this prediction, I examine how recidivism varies with enforcement intensity in
individuals’ home municipalities. I proxy enforcement intensity by the number of speeding
tickets issued per car-owning resident, averaged over 2018–2019. Appendix Figure A.28
illustrates substantial variation in monitoring intensity across municipalities.34 I then divide
the sample into tertiles based on this measure.
Appendix Table B.10 presents estimates of specific deterrence effects by monitoring
intensity tertiles. Although imprecise, the point estimates are consistent with the hypothesis
that specific deterrence effects peak when monitoring intensity is intermediate. Columns
(3)–(4) suggest that fine size has a substantially larger impact on recidivism in intermediate-
monitoring regions than in either low- or high-monitoring areas. Importantly, Panel A shows
that this pattern is not driven by differences in fine size across regions.
Finally, I examine whether the magnitude of the realized fine affects the probability of a
traffic accident using the RDD approach. My outcome variable is an indicator equal to one
if an individual was involved in a traffic accident as a driver within six months of receiving
a fine. Appendix Table B.13 presents the results. I find no evidence that the magnitude of
the fine affects the probability of an accident. One caveat is that traffic accidents are rare,
as reflected by the low control group mean in Table B.13. This may limit statistical power
to detect anything but very large effects.
4.5
Robustness and Validity Tests
This section shows that my results do not arise from arbitrary RDD specification choices.
First, one concern is that the selected specification approximates the unknown conditional
expectation function poorly. To alleviate these concerns, Appendix Table B.8 shows that
I obtain similar results when I use a specification with a second-order polynomial or con-
duct the analysis using the robust approach proposed by Calonico et al. (2014b). Further,
Appendix Figure A.18 shows ”honest” Armstrong and Koles´ar (2020) confidence intervals
that incorporate the potential bias in the estimates.
34Unfortunately, I do not observe the number of speed cameras directly and must rely on this proxy.
30

=== PAGINA 32 ===
Second, Appendix Figure A.10 demonstrates that the point estimates are insensitive
to the bandwidth choice.
Although I tie my hands by selecting the optimal estimation
window using the methods of Calonico et al. (2014b), Appendix Figure A.10 adds additional
confidence that an arbitrary choice of window does not drive the results.
I also carry out a set of additional validity checks. First, Appendix Figure A.12 and
Table 2 demonstrate that the RDD estimates are insensitive to the control variables. Sec-
ond, Appendix Figure A.11 shows results from a placebo test where I randomly reallocate
the cutoff to places where fines do not jump and carry out RDD analysis. I do not find
statistically significant effects using placebo cutoffs.
Additionally, I test whether the effects potentially differ for the general population not
included in my RDD sample. Individuals near the cutoff may be less informed about the
enforcement regime than those driving at lower speeds or those with no prior infractions.
If so, they may respond more strongly to the fine amount than the broader population.
To explore this possibility, I reweight the estimation sample to reflect the population of
car owners who do not receive speeding tickets. I begin with all car owners in the register
data. Then, using a logit model and an individual’s background characteristics, I estimate
the probability that an individual does not appear in the speeding sample. Finally, I re-
estimate the RDD using the predicted probabilities as weights.35 Column 5 of Appendix
Table B.8 presents the reweighted RDD results. The standard and reweighted estimates
are nearly identical.
This suggests that, based on observed background characteristics,
individuals at the cutoff and in the broader population likely respond similarly to the fine.
One limitation is that I cannot directly test for avoidance behavior, such as drivers
altering routes to evade speed cameras.
A natural test would examine whether drivers
avoid specific cameras that have previously issued fines for them. Unfortunately, I cannot
implement this test because my data lack camera-level identifiers. However, the fact that
my identification strategy exploits intensive-margin variation, where both groups face the
same surveillance environment and have equal exposure to camera location information,
mitigates concerns that the results are driven by avoidance.
Finally, I conduct an analysis where my outcome is the cumulative probability of com-
mitting a non-traffic crime. Since my main sample contains individuals who rarely commit
non-traffic crimes, it is unlikely that the size of the speeding ticket would impact non-traffic
crimes. Indeed, I find that the RDD point estimates are very small and not statistically sig-
nificant when my outcome is the cumulative probability of non-traffic criminality. Appendix
Figure A.15 reports these results.
35Appendix Table B.9 lists the background characteristics used in the regression. Appendix Figure A.27
shows the predicted probabilities from the model.
31

=== PAGINA 33 ===
5
What Explains the Smooth Distributions and Reactions to
a Larger Fine?
So far, I have presented four empirical findings. First, I demonstrate that despite significant
incentives, individuals do not bunch just below the income-based fine cutoff. Second, my
findings indicate that realized fine size reduces recidivism in the short term. Third, the
larger the realized fine, the larger the ex-post reaction by drivers.
Specifically, higher-
income drivers who face the largest jumps in assessed fines experience the largest drop in
recidivism. Fourth, the effect on reoffending fades out over time.
In this section, I present a simple theoretical framework that seeks to rationalize these
puzzling results, building on previous models in related literature (Traxler et al., 2018). My
conceptual framework incorporates two types of optimization frictions that could reconcile
the main results.36
First, I demonstrate that adjustment costs may attenuate drivers’
response to fine hikes and result in little or no bunching below the cutoff, which indicates
a discontinuous increase in the assessed speeding fine. If adjustment costs are high enough,
the distribution may be completely smooth. However, under a model with adjustment costs,
individuals should not react to realized fines. The intuition for this result is that drivers
already know precisely how the system works, but because it is too costly to monitor speed
perfectly, they choose not to do so. As a result, a realized fine does not bring any new
information that could change his/her behavior next period.
Second, I present a model with information frictions that can generate the observed
patterns in the data.
The model builds on the idea that individuals use the so-called
”ironing heuristic” and approximate marginal prices with average prices if the cognitive cost
of perceiving complex pricing schemes is considerable (Rees-Jones and Taubinsky, 2019).
In the model, drivers replace a complex true penalty scheme with a rule of thumb that
the magnitude of the fine increases linearly with speed. Because of this heuristic, drivers
ignore the jump in the marginal price of speeding at the cutoff, leading to a smooth speed
distribution, as I observe in the data. However, when drivers are hit with a fine, they may
change their behavior in the future. If an individual receives a larger fine than expected
based on the linear rule, she concludes that the relationship between the size of the ticket
and speed must be steeper than she expected. She will use this steeper penalty function
in the next period and drive more slowly. Finally, based on the idea of Nyarko (1991), I
show that there are drivers whose beliefs about the slope of the penalty function will never
converge. This may explain the fade-out in effect.
36These frictions have been explored in related literatures (Chetty et al., 2011; Chetty, 2012; Kostøl and
Myhre, 2021) to explain attenuated responses to incentive changes.
32

=== PAGINA 34 ===
5.1
A Stylized Model of Speeding with Adjustment Costs
Individuals choose how fast over the speed limit to go x ∈[0, X]. They value speed via the
function u(x, θ) = θx−x2 that is strictly concave in x and increasing in type θ. Individuals’
taste for speed has a continuous and smooth distribution G(θ). With probability p, the
driver is caught speeding and receives a fine, which is a step function where
f(x) =













0 if x = 0
fl if 0 < x ≤xh
fh if x > xh.
Finally, optimization frictions ψ make adjusting speed costly.37 Since my empirical part
focuses on the intensive margin variation, I also ignore the extensive margin in the model.
Drivers’ optimization problem takes the following form
max
x
EU = u(x, θ) −p(fl + fh · 1[x > xh]) −ψ1[x̸ = x∗].
The last term of the problem implies that individuals pay an adjustment cost ψ if they
do not locate at their interior optimum x∗given by the first-order condition.
Frictionless Model To illustrate the impact of fines and optimization frictions on optimal
speed, let us first consider the problem without them. First, without fines, drivers locate
at their interior optimum
x∗
such that
∂u(x, θ)/∂x = 0.
Thus, speeding distribution x∗(θ) will be smooth due to the smooth type distribution G(θ).
Next, let us introduce speeding tickets. When fines are imposed, a continuum of indi-
viduals who value speeding enough such that their interior optimum x∗is higher than the
fine notch just above xh, will slow down and bunch to the corner solution where speed is
xc = xh
such that
∂u(x, θ)/∂x̸ = 0
Because of bunching, we should see excess mass at xh. However, some drivers do not react:
individuals whose interior optimum speed is lower than the speed limit or whose taste for
speed is high enough remain in their interior optimum.
Adjustment Costs Finally, adjustment costs may attenuate the driver’s response to fines
37As demonstrated by Chetty (2012), Kleven and Waseem (2013) and Kostøl and Myhre (2021), optimiza-
tion frictions may attenuate individuals’ reactions to discontinuous changes in marginal or average prices.
In my case, the adjustment costs may arise, for example, from the fact that if individuals cannot drive at
the speed defined by their type, they have to monitor their speed constantly, which decreases utility.
33

=== PAGINA 35 ===
Figure 10: Expected Utility, Speed, and Speeding Distribution
(a) Expected utility and Speed
EU
x
h

Speed
Low Type
Medium Type
High type
(b) Speeding Distribution
Number of Observations
x
h

Speed
No Fines
Fines & Adjustment costs
Fines & No Adjustment Costs
and decrease the mass at the corner solution. Under adjustment costs, the driving speed is
given by
x =





xc,
if [u(xc, θ) −p · fl] −[u(x∗, θ) −p · (fl + fh)] ≥ψ
x∗,
if [u(xc, θ) −p · fl] −[u(x∗, θ) −p · (fl + fh)] < ψ.
(4)
The equation 4 demonstrates that only individuals whose gain from reallocating from the
interior solution to the corner solution is larger than the adjustment cost change their
behavior. In other words, fewer individuals react to fines when adjustment costs are present,
implying that we should observe less mass at the fine cutoff compared to a frictionless world.
Figure 10 illustrates the results stated above. Figure 10(a) shows the expected utility
function for three different types.
The dashed (solid) line shows the utility from speed
without (with) fines. The medium-type individual may increase utility by moving to the
corner solutions xc at 80 km/h. However, low- and high-type individuals do not have an
incentive to react to speeding tickets. Low-type’s interior optimum is less than the speed
limit, whereas the expected punishment does not deter the high-type enough.
Figure 10(b) demonstrates the impact of speeding tickets on speed distribution. Solid
blue lines show the distribution without tickets. Black dots illustrate that the notch in
expected punishment moves some people to the corner solution, creating excess mass just
below the speeding limit and a hole above it. Finally, the dashed blue line plots the distri-
bution when adjustment costs impact drivers’ behavior. The mass concentration below the
cutoff is smaller with the adjustment costs.
The model predicts that we should see sharp bunching below when frictions do not exist.
However, adjustment costs attenuate individuals’ responses and bunching. In extreme cases,
the speed distribution may be smooth if individuals consider the expected punishment small
compared to adjustment costs.
34

=== PAGINA 36 ===
5.2
A Model with Misspecification and Learning
Next, I present an alternative version of the model in which individuals make speed decisions
using a misspecified model and learn from their past choices. Extensive literature shows that
individuals do not necessarily adjust their behavior to marginal price changes as a simple
economic theory would suggest. One explanation for the muted responses is that people use
the ”ironing” heuristic when facing complex non-linear price schedules. If people find the
mental cost of understanding a non-linear price scheme to be high, they replace the complex
version with a linear approximation. In the case of speeding, the ”ironing” heuristic could
arise from the fact that people do not remember the exact details of the system, or they
are just concentrating on many things while driving. (Rees-Jones and Taubinsky, 2019)
Motivated by literature suggesting that people respond to average prices, I assume that
people replace the complex non-linear penalty scheme with linear approximation. They
start with a prior about the slope of the penalty function that they use to solve for optimal
speed. Since the misspecified penalty function is linear, they cannot end up with a corner
solution, ruling out bunching.
The optimal speed determines the signal the individuals
receive. After observing the signal, individuals construct a posterior, which works as the
next period’s prior. Individuals learn myopically, meaning that they do not experiment.
The optimization problem with misspecification and learning takes the form
max
xt EUt = u(xt, θ) −p · ˆft(x),
where ˆft(x) = βxt + fl1[x > 0] stands for individuals’ perceived penalty function at time t.
The slope β is an unknown random variable and according to an individual’s prior beliefs
β ∼N[µβ, τ −1
β ]. The known constant equals the low fine fl.
Each period, the individual chooses a speed such that ∂ut(x)/∂x −p · ∂ˆft(x)/∂x = 0. If
they are caught speeding, they receive a fine that they interpret as a signal. The signal takes
form st = βf
t + ηt, η ∼N[µs, τ −1
s ]. If speed is larger than xh, the individual receives a large
fine (βh
t ). Otherwise, βf
t is βl
t. After seeing the signal, the individual forms a posterior for
β using Bayes’ rule. Since the prior and signal are normal random variables, the posterior
is a weighted average of prior and signal: ˆβ = τβµβ+τss
τβ+τs
(Baley and Veldkamp, 2021). The
relative precision of the prior and signal determines the weights.
The model with misspecification generates the following results related closely to my
empirical exercise.
Proposition 1. Drivers do not bunch below the fine cutoff at time t = 1, generating a
smooth speeding distribution.
For a proof, see Appendix Section C.
35

=== PAGINA 37 ===
The proposition follows directly from the fact that drivers ignore the discontinuity be-
cause they use a misspecified model. In other words, all the drivers locate at their interior
optimum where ∂u(x, θ)/∂x = p · ˆβ, leading to zero excess mass at the fine cutoff.
Proposition 2. Under the assumptions of the model, a driver with type θ would drive
slower at time t = 2 if she were located just above the cutoff xh versus below it at time
t = 1. Furthermore, the size of the reaction increases with the size of the discontinuity.
For a proof, see Appendix Section C.
This result means that if a person with type θ drives faster than the cutoff xh, she will
receive a higher signal compared to a situation in which her speed is lower than xh. As
a result, the perceived slope of the penalty function is steeper in the next period if the
individual crosses the threshold. Thus, in the next period, she will slow down. The larger
the discontinuity, the steeper the updated slope, and the larger the individual’s reaction.
Proposition 3. There exists a continuum of individuals [θl, θh] whose beliefs and actions
never converge but oscillate around the speeding ticket discontinuity.
For a proof, see Appendix Section C.
Figure 11 illustrates some of the results stated above. Consider an individual at the
time t who holds a prior represented by a dark blue line in Figure 11(a). Using this prior,
the individual chooses a speed such that ∂u(x, θ)/∂x = p · ˆβ. Assume that the speed is
x∗, and hence, she receives a low signal. Let us also suppose that the prior and signal are
equally precise, implying that the posterior is just an average between the signal and the
prior. The dashed light blue line represents the posterior in Figure 11(a).
Next, consider another individual who happens to choose a speed equal to 80+ϵ where
ϵ is some tiny number. Due to this minimal difference, the second individual receives a
larger signal, shown by a solid red line. The dashed red line plots the posterior for the
second individual. Next, individuals choose new speeds using posteriors as their priors.
The individual who received the higher signal due to discontinuity will drive at a slower
speed than the individual who received the lower signal.
Interestingly, if individuals make decisions using a misspecified model and learn from
their actions, there will be some individuals whose beliefs and actions do not converge but
follow cycles (Nyarko, 1991). Figures 11(b) and 11(c) illustrate the result and show how
the individual’s beliefs and speed evolve. The individual starts with the belief that the
slope of the penalty is low, chooses a speed over 80 km/h, receives a large fine, and forms a
posterior higher than the prior. The individual chooses a lower speed and receives a lower
signal in the next period. Over time, individual’s beliefs decrease back to a low starting
level. However, when the individual again thinks the slope is low, she decides to speed
again, leading to a new cycle.
36

=== PAGINA 38 ===
Figure 11: The Evolution of Speed and Beliefs in the Model with Misspecification and
Learning
(a) Prior, Signal, and Posterior
Fine

x
h
Speed
True Penalty Function 
Common Prior
Low signal
High Signal
Low Posterior
High Posterior
(b) The Evolution of Beliefs
High Slope
Low Slope

Beliefs
Time
(c) The Evolution of Speed
High Fine Cutoff

Speed
Time
37

=== PAGINA 39 ===
5.3
Predictions of the Models
Table 4 summarizes the predictions from both models.
Both models can generate the
zero-bunching result. However, only the model with misspecification and learning predicts
that a larger speeding ticket (vs.
smaller) reduces recidivism.
Furthermore, under the
misspecification and learning, we may see a fade-out in effect due to cycling beliefs.
The evidence presented in Section 4.2 supports the story that drivers make decisions
using a misspecified model, leading to a smooth speeding distribution. In addition to con-
tinuous speeding distributions, I find that the size of the speeding ticket reduces the prob-
ability of reoffending, but the effect fades out over time. The model with misspecification
and learning can explain both of these results.
Table 4: Predictions from the Models
Model with:
Prediction
Adjustment Costs
Misspecification
Bunching
Possibly
No
Reactions to larger fine
No
Yes
Cycle
No
Possibly
The table lists the predictions from the models presented in the Section 5.
5.4
Alternative Interpretations
There are other possible interpretations of the findings, particularly regarding the potential
fade-out. Specifically, some of the findings are consistent with associative recall or limited
memory models. Associative recall refers to the tendency to retrieve past experiences that
resemble the current context when making decisions. In the model by Bordalo et al. (2020),
individuals make decisions based on price and quality norms shaped by cues and memories
that combine hedonic and contextual attributes. When facing new decisions, individuals
give greater weight to memories whose cues closely match the current context.
In my setting, fixed fine and income-based fine groups face similar contexts, but the
latter receives a larger fine. This makes the large fine the salient cue, leaving a strong
memory trace.
When deciding whether to speed again, that high-cost episode is more
likely to be recalled, leading to greater deterrence. However, this effect may fade through
social learning. Each penalty-free trip or encounter with someone who received a modest
fine reinforces low-penalty signals. Since fixed fines are more common, drivers are likely to
encounter these cues more frequently, diluting the original memory and reducing deterrence.
A related interpretation draws on the literature on selective recall. Zimmermann (2020)
shows that negative and positive feedback shift beliefs in the short term, but only positive
38

=== PAGINA 40 ===
feedback has lasting effects. This aligns with models by B´enabou and Tirole (2002; 2004),
in which individuals selectively forget information that contradicts their self-image. In a
speeding context, a large income-based fine may conflict with a driver’s belief that they
are responsible or law-abiding. To preserve that self-image, the driver may suppress the
memory of the fine, weakening its long-term deterrent effect. In contrast, a lower fixed fine
may be seen as less threatening and easier to retain.
While associative or selective recall can explain both the initial response and the fade-
out, they cannot account for the absence of bunching in the speeding distribution.
To
explain that pattern, the model must incorporate misperception. Once misperception is
introduced, associative recall becomes unnecessary to explain the observed dynamics. In
that sense, the misperception model offers a more parsimonious explanation for the findings.
I also provide evidence that the fade-out is unlikely to result from nonlinearities in
the control group’s behavior or asymmetric exposure to income-based fines. Figure 7(b)
shows that the control group’s outcome increases linearly over time, leaving no evidence of
behavioral shifts that could explain convergence. Second, Appendix Figure A.25 shows that
crossing the income-based fine cutoff does not raise the likelihood of later receiving such a
fine, ruling out this channel as a driver of the decay.
6
Distributional Implications of Income-Based Versus Fixed
Fines at the Cutoff
What would be the distributional consequences of moving from an income-based fine in-
crease to a fixed fine increase that holds constant the aggregate reduction in reoffending
at the 20 km/h cutoff? To answer this question, this section uses the heterogeneous IV
estimates from Section 4.3 to quantify the income-invariant fine increase required to match
the aggregate reduction in reoffending induced by the current income-based discontinuity.
The implied safety-neutral fixed fine increase is €215. Although this is close to the average
observed increase (€204), the distributional implications are pronounced: relative to the
current income-based schedule, the fine increase would be more than 300% larger for the
bottom income quartile and roughly 50% smaller for the top quartile. Safety-neutral fines
would also shift reoffending toward higher-income individuals.38
A Safety-Neutral Fixed Fine
I calculate the safety-neutral fixed fine increase as follows.
Let g index income quartiles. Define sg as the share of observations in quartile g at the
38My exercise takes into account only the changes at the cutoff, which is why it should be thought of as a
local counterfactual exercise. Further, I assume that the income composition of drivers at the cutoff remains
unchanged under the counterfactual.
39

=== PAGINA 41 ===
threshold, ˆβg as the quartile-specific IV estimate (effect on reoffending per €1), ∆F IB
g
as the income-specific discontinuity in fines (first stage), and ∆F flat as the hypothetical
safety-neutral fixed fine increase.
The observed threshold-crossing effect on reoffending due to the income-based fine is
equal to
∆SIB =
X
g
sg ˆβg ∆F IB
g
.
Under a fixed fine, the corresponding effect would be:
∆Sflat =
X
g
sg ˆβg ∆F flat = ∆F flat X
g
sg ˆβg.
Equating ∆SIB = ∆Sflat and solving for ∆F flat yields the safety-neutral fixed fine increase
∆F flat =
P
g sg ˆβg ∆F IB
g
P
g sg ˆβg
.
(5)
Figure 12(a) compares the safety-neutral fixed fine increase (red bars) to the observed
income-based increases (blue bars). Applying equation (5), I find that the safety-neutral
fixed fine increase would be € 215. This is close to the average observed increase (€ 204,
Table 3), but its distributional implications differ substantially. Relative to the observed
schedule, the increase would more than quadruple for the bottom income quartile (€ 52 to
€ 215) and roughly double for the second quartile (€ 103 to € 215). It would rise modestly
for the third quartile (€ 187 to € 215; about 15%), and it would fall sharply for the top
quartile (€ 499 to € 215; about 57%).39
These changes are sizable relative to income levels. Under the safety-neutral fixed sched-
ule, the fine for offenses just above the 20 km/h cutoff would be €415 (€200 baseline plus
a €215 increase). For drivers in the bottom income quartile, this corresponds to roughly
41% of average monthly net income, compared with 25% under the current income-based
schedule. For the second quartile, the share would rise from 16% to 21%. By contrast, the
burden would fall from 15% to 9% for drivers in the top quartile.40
Although I construct the two systems to produce the same local reduction in reoffending
at the cutoff, they imply different patterns of behavioral adjustment across income groups.
Figure 12(b) reports the implied threshold-crossing effects on reoffending by income quartile
39The fine jump for the bottom quartile is small (about €52), so the treatment contrast for this group
is modest. This makes it harder to pin down the deterrence effect for the bottom quartile. As sensitivity
checks, I set the bottom-quartile IV estimate equal to (i) zero and (ii) the second quartile’s IV estimate.
These exercises imply safety-neutral fixed fines of €207 and €153, respectively. In both cases, the qualitative
distributional conclusions remain unchanged.
40Figure 8 presents average monthly net income by income quartile. The average monthly net income is
€1011 for the first quartile, €1951 for the second quartile, €2642 for the third quartile, and €4745 for the
fourth quartile.
40

=== PAGINA 42 ===
Figure 12: Safety-neutral Fines and Reoffending
(a) Safety-neutral Fines
52
215
103
215
187
215
499
215
0
100
200
300
400
500
1
2
3
4
Income Quartile
Observed income-based fine increase
Safety-neutral fixed fine increase
(b) Reoffending Under Safety-neutral Fines
0.001
0.005
-0.024
-0.050
-0.028
-0.032
-0.045
-0.019
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
.02
1
2
3
4
Income Quartile
Observed threshold-crossing effect under income-based fine
Predicted threshold-crossing effect under safety-neutral flat fine
Figure plots the safety-neutral fixed fine increase and its implied effect on reoffending at the income-based
cutoff. Panel (a) shows the observed income-based fine increase (blue) and the estimated safety-neutral fixed
fine increase (red) by income quartile. The safety-neutral fixed fine increase is calculated using equation 5.
By construction, the safety-neutral fixed fine increase yields the same aggregate specific deterrence effect
as the observed income-based increase. Panel (b) reports the specific deterrence effects by quartile under
the income-based system (blue bars) and the counterfactual effects implied by the safety-neutral fixed fine
increase. Counterfactual effects are computed as the product of the fixed fine increase and the quartile-
specific IV estimate (Table 3).
under each system. To obtain the counterfactual effects under the fixed-fine schedule, I
multiply the safety-neutral fixed-fine increase by the quartile-specific IV estimate. Relative
to the current income-based schedule, the fixed-fine counterfactual reduces reoffending in
the lower income quartiles and increases it in the top quartile.
Discussion
The safety-neutral fixed fine counterfactual illustrates the trade-off between
income-based and fixed fine systems. Fixed fines have practical advantages, such as ease
of administration. Moreover, from a classical Beckerian perspective, optimal fines need not
depend on income unless the harm from the offense varies with income (Becker, 1968).
However, if policymakers seek to minimize safety risks from speeding through fixed
fines alone, the implied fine level may impose substantial financial strain on low-income
households. Mello (2024) finds that a speeding fine of $200 can push especially illiquid low-
income households to miss bill payments, with persistent downstream consequences such as
lower credit scores and borrowing limits, weaker employment, and reduced homeownership.
Although the institutional setting differs, these findings suggest that the €415 fine implied
by my safety-neutral fixed fine counterfactual — roughly 41% of monthly net income for
bottom-quartile drivers — could plausibly generate financial distress among low-income
households.
The counterfactual exercise also suggests that moving to a safety-neutral fixed-fine sys-
tem may have revenue implications for governments. Under this counterfactual, fine revenue
may decline through two channels: high-income drivers would face substantially lower fines
41

=== PAGINA 43 ===
than under the current income-based schedule, mechanically reducing revenue per offense
among those drivers; and the higher burden on low-income drivers may reduce collection
rates if fines exceed what some drivers can realistically pay (Norris and Rose, 2024). This
concern is relevant to ongoing debates in the United States, where local governments in-
creasingly rely on fixed fines and court fees to finance expenditures (ALCPIL, 2020).41
Finally, the safety-neutral counterfactual highlights how income-based and fixed fines
differ with respect to the proportionality of punishment when overall safety is held fixed.
Retributive justice holds that punishment should reflect the wrongfulness of the act. A
central element of modern retributive theory is the principle of proportionality: identical
offenses should receive equivalent sanctions. Under the income-based system, the fine equals
25% of monthly net income for drivers in the bottom income quartile and 15% for those
in the top quartile.
Under the safety-neutral fixed fine, these shares are 41% and 9%,
respectively.42 By this metric, replacing income-based fines with fixed fines would widen the
gap in effective punishment across income groups, moving further away from proportionality
and from the equal-burden rationale underlying Finland’s day-fine system.
7
Conclusions
This paper studied drivers’ reactions to discontinuous changes in the criminal sanctions
created by the Finnish income-based fine system. First, I find that drivers do not bunch
below the income-based fine cutoff, leading to unexpectedly smooth speeding distributions.
This result also holds for high-income drivers experiencing the largest jumps in the size of
the fine. However, I show that especially high-income drivers are less likely to recidivate in
the short term when they are assigned a larger ticket vs. a smaller one. Finally, I calculate
that replacing the income-based fine increase with a safety-neutral fixed fine would require
a fixed fine increase of about €215.
To reconcile these results, I present a theoretical framework in which individuals make
decisions and learn using a misspecified model of the penalty schedule. This model ratio-
nalizes the smooth speeding distributions and the specific deterrence response.
My results have important implications for the design of criminal sanctions. First, they
suggest that punishments may have their intended effects only if the penalty schedule is
sufficiently salient. Second, the counterfactual exercise shows that replacing the income-
41In Appendix Section C.3, I apply optimal income and commodity taxation theory to derive the optimal
income-based fine when the government aims to redistribute using fines. I show that the optimal income-
based fine equals the size of the externality plus the net social value of redistribution, which is divided by
the semi-elasticity of speeding with respect to fines.
42Appendix Section C.2 shows that under risk aversion, a fixed fine implies larger utility losses for low-
income than for high-income drivers.
42

=== PAGINA 44 ===
based fine increase with a safety-neutral fixed fine would substantially redistribute the size
of fines across the income distribution.
References
Aizer, A. and Doyle, J., Joseph J. (2015). Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital, and Future Crime:
Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges *. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130 (2), 759–803.
ALCPIL (2020). Fees, fines, and the funding of public services: A curriculum for reform. Contributors:
Mitali Nagrecha, Anna VanCleave, Stephanie Garlock, Judith Resnik, Lisa Foster, Jeff Selbin.
Armstrong, T. B. and Koles´ar, M. (2020). Simple and honest confidence intervals in nonparametric
regression. Quantitative Economics, 11 (1), 1–39.
Baley, I. and Veldkamp, L. (2021). Bayesian Learning. Working Paper 29338, National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research.
Banerjee, A., Duflo, E., Keniston, D. and Singh, N. (2019). The Efficient Deployment of Police
Resources: Theory and New Evidence from a Randomized Drunk Driving Crackdown in India. Working
Paper 26224, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bastani, S. and Selin, H. (2014). Bunching and non-bunching at kink points of the swedish tax schedule.
Journal of Public Economics, 109, 36–49.
Bauernschuster, S. and Rekers, R. (2022). Speed limit enforcement and road safety. Journal of Public
Economics, 210, 104663.
Becker, G. S. (1968). Crime and punishment: An economic approach. Journal of Political Economy, 76 (2),
169–217.
B´enabou, R. and Tirole, J. (2002). Self-confidence and personal motivation. The quarterly journal of
economics, 117 (3), 871–915.
— and Tirole, J. (2004). Willpower and personal rules. Journal of Political Economy, 112 (4), 848–886.
Berk, R. H. (1966). Limiting Behavior of Posterior Distributions when the Model is Incorrect. The Annals
of Mathematical Statistics, 37 (1), 51 – 58.
Best, M. C., Cloyne, J. S., Ilzetzki, E. and Kleven, H. J. (2019). Estimating the Elasticity of In-
tertemporal Substitution Using Mortgage Notches. The Review of Economic Studies, 87 (2), 656–690.
Bhuller, M., Dahl, G. B., Løken, K. V. and Mogstad, M. (2020). Incarceration, recidivism, and
employment. Journal of Political Economy, 128 (4), 1269–1324.
Bohren, J. A. and Hauser, D. N. (2021). Learning with heterogeneous misspecified models: Characteri-
zation and robustness. Econometrica, 89 (6), 3025–3077.
Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N. and Shleifer, A. (2020). Memory, attention, and choice*. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 135 (3), 1399–1442.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D. and Titiunik, R. (2014a). Robust nonparametric confidence intervals for
regression-discontinuity designs. Econometrica, 82 (6), 2295–2326.
—, — and — (2014b). Robust nonparametric confidence intervals for regression-discontinuity designs.
Econometrica, 82 (6), 2295–2326.
Chalfin, A. and McCrary, J. (2017). Criminal deterrence: A review of the literature. Journal of Economic
Literature, 55 (1), 5–48.
Chetty, R. (2012). Bounds on elasticities with optimization frictions: A synthesis of micro and macro
evidence on labor supply. Econometrica, 80 (3), 969–1018.
—, Friedman, J. N., Olsen, T. and Pistaferri, L. (2011). Adjustment Costs, Firm Responses, and Micro
vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish Tax Records *. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 126 (2), 749–804.
—, — and Saez, E. (2013). Using differences in knowledge across neighborhoods to uncover the impacts of
the eitc on earnings. American Economic Review, 103 (7), 2683–2721.
DeAngelo, G. and Hansen, B. (2014). Life and death in the fast lane: Police enforcement and traffic
fatalities. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6 (2), 231–57.
Diamond, P. (1975). A many-person ramsey tax rule. Journal of Public Economics, 4 (4), 335–342.
Doleac, J. (2017). Encouraging Desistance from Crime. Tech. rep.
Drago, F., Galbiati, R. and Vertova, P. (2009). The deterrent effects of prison: Evidence from a natural
experiment. Journal of Political Economy, 117 (2), 257–280.
—, Mengel, F. and Traxler, C. (2020). Compliance behavior in networks: Evidence from a field experi-
ment. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 12 (2), 96–133.
43

=== PAGINA 45 ===
Duˇsek, L. and Traxler, C. (2022). Learning from Law Enforcement. Journal of the European Economic
Association, jvab037.
Einav, L., Finkelstein, A. and Schrimpf, P. (2019). Reprint of: Bunching at the kink: Implications
for spending responses to health insurance contracts. Journal of Public Economics, 171, 117–130,
trans-Atlantic Public Economics Seminar 2016.
Elminejad, A., Havranek, T. and Irsova, Z. (2025). Relative risk aversion: A meta-analysis. Journal of
Economic Surveys.
Esponda, I. and Pouzo, D. (2016). Berk–nash equilibrium: A framework for modeling agents with mis-
specified models. Econometrica, 84 (3), 1093–1130.
Finlay, K., Gross, M., Lieberman, C., Luh, E. and Mueller-Smith, M. (2023). The impact of criminal
financial sanctions: A multi-state analysis of survey and administrative data. Working Paper.
Fintraffic (2020). Traffic Monitoring System (TMS) Speed Data, 2020.
Ganong, P. and J¨ager, S. (2018). A permutation test for the regression kink design. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 113 (522), 494–504.
Gehrsitz, M. (2017). Speeding, punishment, and recidivism: Evidence from a regression discontinuity
design. The Journal of Law and Economics, 60 (3), 497–528.
Goncalves, F. and Mello, S. (2021). A few bad apples?
racial bias in policing. American Economic
Review, 111 (5), 1406–41.
— and — (2023). Police Discretion and Public Safety. Tech. rep.
Hansen, B. (2015). Punishment and deterrence: Evidence from drunk driving. American Economic Review,
105 (4), 1581–1617.
Harju, J., Matikka, T. and Rauhanen, T. (2019). Compliance costs vs. tax incentives: Why do en-
trepreneurs respond to size-based regulations? Journal of Public Economics, 173, 139–164.
HE (1920). Hallituksen esitys 36/1920.
Ito, K. (2014). Do consumers respond to marginal or average price? evidence from nonlinear electricity
pricing. American Economic Review, 104 (2), 537–63.
Kleven, H. J. (2016). Bunching. Annual Review of Economics, 8 (1), 435–464.
— and Waseem, M. (2013). Using Notches to Uncover Optimization Frictions and Structural Elasticities:
Theory and Evidence from Pakistan *. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128 (2), 669–723.
Kostøl, A. R. and Myhre, A. S. (2021). Labor supply responses to learning the tax and benefit schedule.
American Economic Review, 111 (11), 3733–66.
Lee, D. and McCrary, J. (2017). The deterrence effect of prison: Dynamic theory and evidence. Advances
in Econometrics, 38, 73–146.
Lochner, L. (2007). Individual perceptions of the criminal justice system. American Economic Review,
97 (1), 444–460.
Londo˜no-V´elez, J., Rodr´ıguez, C. and S´anchez, F. (2020). Upstream and downstream impacts of college
merit-based financial aid for low-income students: Ser pilo paga in colombia. American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 12 (2), 193–227.
Mello, S. (2024). Fines and financial wellbeing. The Review of Economic Studies.
Mueller-Smith, M. (2014). The Criminal and Labor Market Impacts of Incarceration. Working Paper.
National Police Board of Finland (2020). Speeding Ticket Data, 2018–2020.
Norris, S. and Rose, E. K. (2024). Laffer’s day in court: The revenue effects of criminal justice fees and
fines. Journal of Public Economics, 240, 105249.
Nyarko, Y. (1991). Learning in mis-specified models and the possibility of cycles. Journal of Economic
Theory, 55 (2), 416–427.
Our World in Data (2022). Causes of Death.
Philippe, A. (2022). Learning by doing. How do criminals learn about criminal law? Working Paper.
Rees-Jones, A. and Taubinsky, D. (2019). Measuring “Schmeduling”. The Review of Economic Studies,
87 (5), 2399–2438.
Rincke, J. and Traxler, C. (2011). Enforcement spillovers. The Review of Economics and Statistics,
93 (4), 1224–1234.
Rose, E. K. and Shem-Tov, Y. (2021). How does incarceration affect reoffending? estimating the dose-
response function. Journal of Political Economy, 129 (12), 3302–3356.
Saez, E. (2001). Using elasticities to derive optimal income tax rates. The review of economic studies, 68 (1),
205–229.
44

=== PAGINA 46 ===
Statistics Finland (2022a). Finnish Police Reports.
Statistics Finland (2022b). FOLK Basic Data, 1987–2020.
Statistics Finland (2022c). Statistics on Offences and Coercive Measures.
Statistics Finland (2023). Road Accident Data, 1989–2022.
Traxler, C., Westermaier, F. G. and Wohlschlegel, A. (2018). Bunching on the autobahn? speeding
responses to a ‘notched’ penalty scheme. Journal of Public Economics, 157, 78–94.
van Benthem, A. (2015). What is the optimal speed limit on freeways? Journal of Public Economics, 124,
44–62.
WHO (2017). Managing Speed. Report, World Health Organization.
Zimmermann, F. (2020). The dynamics of motivated beliefs. American Economic Review, 110 (2), 337–61.
45

=== PAGINA 47 ===
Online Appendix
A
Figures
Figure A.1: The Number of Crime Reports in Finland
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Crime Reports in Millions
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Non-traffic Crimes
Traffic Crimes
Notes: Figure presents the number of crime reports received by Finnish Police. Source: Statistics Finland
(2022c)
46

=== PAGINA 48 ===
Figure A.2: The Most Common Causes of deaths for 15 to 49 year olds globally in 2019
0
.5
1
1.5
 Chronic kidney disease
 Interpersonal violence
Cirrhosis and oth. chr. liv. dis.
 Tuberculosis
 Self-harm
 Digestive diseases
 HIV/AIDS
 Road injuries
 Neoplasms
 Cardiovascular diseases
Annual Number of Deaths in Millions
Source: Our World in Data
Notes: Source: Our World in Data (2022)
Figure A.3: Police Speeding Monitoring Camera
Notes: Figure shows an automatic speeding camera used by the Finnish police to monitor speeding.
47

=== PAGINA 49 ===
Figure A.4: Correlation Between Income Measures
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Income based on income-based fine
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Observed income in register data
Observed
Theoretical Fine Based on Yearly Income
Slope: 0.67
Correlation: 0.61 
Notes: The figure shows the correlation between income deduced from the size of the income-based fine and
income obtained from the administrative data.
Figure A.5: The Relationship between Income, Probability of Speeding, and Crime Report
0
.1
.2
.3
P(Crime report) between Jan. 2018 - May 2020
0
20
40
60
80
100
Income Percentile Based on Income between 2013-2017
All Speeding Tickets
Fixed Speeding Tickets 
Income-based Speeding Tickets 
Not Traffic Crime
Notes: Figure conducts the same exercise as Figure 2, but does not restrict to households with a car. The
figure plots the relationship between income percentile and the probability of observing the individual in the
Police crime report statistics between January 2018 and May 2020. To construct the figure, I take everyone
in cohorts born between 1998 and 1953. I calculate the income percentile by comparing individuals’ mean
income over 2015-2017 to those in the same birth cohort. Blue dots with circles show the share of individuals
receiving a speeding ticket in each percentile between January 2018 and May 2020. Red diamonds show the
share of individuals in Police crime report data when the suspected crime is not a traffic offense between
January 2018 and May 2020 for each percentile. Small dots and squares decompose the speeding ticket
averages into shares that arise from fixed fines (blue dots) and income-based fines (grey squares).
48

=== PAGINA 50 ===
Figure A.6: The Relationship Between Mean Income and Income Percentile
0
50000
100000
150000
Mean Yearly Income
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentile
Notes: The figure plots the relationship between mean income and income percentile. To construct the
figure, I take everyone in cohorts born between 1998 and 1953. I calculate the income percentile by comparing
individuals’ mean income over 2013-2017 to those in the same birth cohort.
Figure A.7: The Relationship Between Income and Crime with Different Specifications
(a) Rank relative to all individuals
0
.1
.2
.3
P(Crime report) between Jan. 2018 - May 2020
0
20
40
60
80
100
Income Percentile Based on Income between 2013-2017
All Speeding Tickets
Fixed Speeding Tickets 
Income-based Speeding Tickets 
Not Traffic Crime
(b) Rank relative to all individuals and a car
in the household
0
.1
.2
.3
P(Crime report) between Jan. 2018 - May 2020
0
20
40
60
80
100
Income Percentile Based on Income between 2013-2017
All Speeding Tickets
Fixed Speeding Tickets 
Income-based Speeding Tickets 
Not Traffic Crime
(c) Rank relative to cohorts born between 1998
and 1953
0
.1
.2
.3
P(Crime report) between Jan. 2018 - May 2020
0
20
40
60
80
100
Income Percentile Based on Income between 2013-2017
All Speeding Tickets
Fixed Speeding Tickets 
Income-based Speeding Tickets 
Not Traffic Crime
(c
(d) Rank relative to cohorts born between
1998 and 1953 with a car in the household
0
.1
.2
.3
P(Crime report) between Jan. 2018 - May 2020
0
20
40
60
80
100
Income Percentile Based on Income between 2013-2017
All Speeding Tickets
Fixed Speeding Tickets 
Income-based Speeding Tickets 
Not Traffic Crime
Notes: Figure shows that the relationship between income and crime shown in the Figure 2 is robust to
different specifications. Panel A measures the rank compared to everyone in cohorts born between 1998 and
1953 but not within the age cohort, as is done in the main figure. Panel B constructs the percentiles as
Panel A but restricts to households with a car. Panel C measures the rank compared to everyone in cohorts
born between 1985 and 1953 but not within the age cohort, as is done in the main figure. Panel D calculates
the percentiles as Panel C but restricts to households with a car.
49

=== PAGINA 51 ===
Figure A.8: Normalized Speed and Cumulative Probability of Accident
0
.005
.01
.015
.02
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Normalized distance from the income-based fine cutoff (km/h)
Notes: The figure presents the probability of being involved in a traffic accident as a function of normalized
speed. The x-axis measures the distance from the income-based fine cutoff in km/h, and the y-axis shows
the probability of being in a traffic accident as a driver within six months after the initial speeding ticket.
Vertical lines indicate the fine discontinuity points. The income-based (fixed) fine cutoff is located at 0 km/h
(–5 km/h). The sample is constructed as described in Section 2.3.
50

=== PAGINA 52 ===
Figure A.9: Speeding Distributions for Reoffenders
(a) Speeding Distributions for Reoffenders
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
Density
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
Normalized distance from the income-based fine cutoff (km/h)
Income-based fines
Fixed fines
(b) Difference in Densities
-.03
-.02
-.01
0
.01
.02
Difference in the Densities
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
Normalized distance from the income-based fine cutoff (km/h)
Difference in the Densities
Notes: Figure Panel a shows the speeding distributions for individuals with at least one speeding incident
in the past 12 months. The distributions are plotted separately for those who received an income-based fine
or fixed during the past 12 months. Figure panel b plots the difference between the distributions.
51

=== PAGINA 53 ===
Figure A.10: RDD Estimates with Different Bandwidths
-.1
-.08
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
RDD Estimate
+-3
+-4
+-5
+-6
Size of the Bandwidth
Conventional RDD 
Bias corrected RDD
Notes: The figure shows results from a robustness test in which I test whether the RDD estimates are
sensitive to bandwidth choice. Black dots show the RDD estimates that are obtained using equation 2.
Black vertical lines plot the 95 percent confidence intervals obtained using standard errors that are clustered
at the individual level. The y-axis shows the size of the RDD estimate. The x-axis indicates the width of
the estimation window. Section 2.3 explains the sample construction.
Figure A.11: RDD Estimates at the Placebo Cutoffs
-.04
-.03
-.02
-.01
0
.01
9
10 
11
12
13
20
The Place of (placebo) Cutoff in Km/H
Placebo cutoff 
Day Fine Cutoff
Notes:
The figure plots RDD estimates I obtain from a permutation test similar to that proposed by
Ganong and J¨ager (2018). In the test, I place placebo cutoffs at the non-discontinuity points and then
run the analysis using the equation 2.
If the setting is valid, we should not observe the impact on the
outcome since the treatment is the same on both sides of the cutoff. The placebo cutoffs and bandwidths
are always defined so that the individuals on the right-hand side of the income-based fine cutoff are not
used in the placebo check. Black diamonds report the results from the placebo check. Red dot reports the
main estimate. The vertical lines report 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at
the individual level. Section 2.3 defines the sample construction.
52

=== PAGINA 54 ===
Figure A.12: RDD Estimates at the day fine cutoff with different specifications if the
limit 80 km/h is omitted
-.08
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
.02
RDD Estimate
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Months since speeding ticket
Conventional RDD without controls
Conventional RDD with controls
Bias corrected RDD
Bias corrected RDD with Controls
Notes: Figure shows results from a similar analysis as Figure 7, but using different specifications.
Red
dots plot the estimates obtained using Equation (2). Diamonds plot the conventional estimates with con-
trols. Squares report biased corrected RDD estimates obtained using the robust approach by Calonico et al.
(2014b). Triangles plot the biased corrected RDD estimates with controls. Vertical lines behind the esti-
mates show the 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level in the
conventional approach. For bias-corrected estimates, the confidence intervals are given by the approach of
Calonico et al. (2014b). Section 2.3 defines sample construction and data. Limit area 80 km/h is omitted
Figure A.13: RDD Estimates at the Day fine cutoff if 80 km/h limit area is included
-.08
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
.02
RDD Estimate
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Months since speeding ticket
Conventional RDD without controls
Conventional RDD with controls
Bias corrected RDD
Bias corrected RDD with Controls
Notes: Figure shows results from a similar analysis as Figures 7 and A.12, but also uses 80 km/h limit area.
Red dots plot the estimates obtained using Equation (2). Diamonds plot the conventional estimates with
controls. Squares report biased corrected RDD estimates obtained using the robust approach by Calonico
et al. (2014b). Triangles plot the biased corrected RDD estimates with controls. Vertical lines behind the
estimates show the 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level in
the conventional approach. For bias-corrected estimates, the confidence intervals are given by the approach
of Calonico et al. (2014b). Section 2.3 defines sample construction and data.
53

=== PAGINA 55 ===
Figure A.14: RDD Estimates at the 15 km/h cutoff
(a) limit 80 km/h omitted
-.08
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
.02
RDD Estimate
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Months since speeding ticket
Conventional RDD without controls
Conventional RDD with controls
Bias corrected RDD
Bias corrected RDD with Controls
(b) limit 80 km/h included
-.08
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
.02
RDD Estimate
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Months since speeding ticket
Conventional RDD without controls
Conventional RDD with controls
Bias corrected RDD
Bias corrected RDD with Controls
Notes: The figure shows results from a similar analysis as Figures 7 and A.12, but uses variation from the
fixed fine cutoff (15 km/h) where the hike does not relate to an individual’s income. The figure panel (a)
plots the RDD when all limit zones except 120 km/h are included. Red dots plot the estimates obtained
using Equation (2). Diamonds plot the conventional estimates with controls. Squares report biased corrected
RDD estimates obtained using the robust approach by Calonico et al. (2014b). Triangles plot the biased
corrected RDD estimates with controls. Vertical lines behind the estimates show the 95 percent confidence
intervals.
Standard errors are clustered at the individual level in the conventional approach.
For bias-
corrected estimates, the confidence intervals are given by the approach of Calonico et al. (2014b). Section
2.3 defines sample construction and data. Figure panel (b) conducts the same analysis but drops the 80
km/h limit zone, where I observe bunching.
54

=== PAGINA 56 ===
Figure A.15: The Impact on Traffic and Non-traffic Crime
-.1
-.08
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
.02
RDD Estimate
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Months Since Fine
Traffic offences
Non-traffic offences
Notes: The figure shows results from a similar analysis as Figure 7, but the primary outcome is cumulative
non-traffic criminal activity. The figure plots the RDD estimates of β obtained using Equation (2) when all
limit zones except 80 km/h and 120 km/h are included. I use local linear regression with a triangular kernel.
Blue diamonds show the results when the outcome is a cumulative probability of committing a non-traffic
crime. As a comparison, black dots show the results I present in the main figure 7. Vertical lines behind
the estimates show the 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
Sample construction and data as defined in Section 2.3.
Figure A.16: RDD estimates when restricting to individuals that can be followed for 12
months
-.1
-.08
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
.02
RDD Estimate
1
3
5
7
9
11
Months Since Fine
Main Estimates
Tickets before July 2019
Notes: The figure shows results from a robustness check that tests how sensitive my results are to the fact
that I can not follow all drivers the entire 12 months. Black diamonds plot the main estimates shown in
Figure 7. Blue dots restrict the sample to drivers I can follow for 12 months. All the estimates are obtained
using equation 2. I use local linear regression with a triangular kernel. Blue diamonds show the results
when the outcome is a cumulative probability of committing a non-traffic crime. As a comparison, black
dots show the results I present in the main figure Figure 7. Vertical lines behind the estimates show the 95
percent confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. Sample construction and
data as defined in Section 2.3.
55

=== PAGINA 57 ===
Figure A.17: RDD Estimates when Outcome Is Created Using Only Speeding Incidents
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
.02
RDD Estimate
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Months Since Fine
All Traffic offences
Only Speeding cases
Notes: Figure shows results from analysis where the outcome is constructed using only speeding incidents.
Black dots plot the main estimates shown in Figure 7 when the outcome is constructed using all traffic
offenses. Blue diamonds show the results when I restrict just to speeding violations. All the estimates are
obtained using equation 2. I use local linear regression with a triangular kernel. Vertical lines behind the
estimates show 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. Sample
construction and data as defined in Section 2.3.
Figure A.18: Standard and Armstrong and Koles´ar (2020) Confidence Intervals
-.08
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
.02
RDD Estimate
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Months Since Speeding Ticket
Armstrong and Kolesar (2020) 95% CI
Conventional 95% CI
Notes: Figure plots the main RDD estimates with conventional and Armstrong and Koles´ar (2020) 95
percent confidence intervals. Red dots plot the RDD estimates I obtain using equation 2. Vertical lines plot
the conventional 95 percent confidence intervals. The shaded area shows the “honest confidence intervals”
of Armstrong and Koles´ar (2020). Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. Sample construction
and data as defined in Section 2.3.
56

=== PAGINA 58 ===
Figure A.19: The Relationship Between Income and Fine in Groups ± 1km/h from Day-
Fine Cutoff
0
200
400
600
800
1000 1200 1400
Speeding ticket in Euros
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Net Monthly Income
Income-based Fine 
Fixed Fine
Income-based Fine
Fixed Fine
Notes: The figure illustrates the link between income and the size of the speeding tickets within groups
below and above the income-based fine cutoff. Black dots show the relationship in the treatment group,
where speeding tickets vary with income. Blue circles show the same relationship in the treatment group,
where everyone receives a similar fine. Section 2.3 describes the sample creation.
57

=== PAGINA 59 ===
Figure A.20: The Distribution of the Number of Tickets Received Before the Speeding
Incident at time t
(a) Tickets received over the 12 months before the ticket at time t
80.286
16.275
2.655
0.784
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percent
0
1
2
≥ 3
The Number of Tickets Received Over the 12 Months Before the Incident
(b) Tickets received over the 48 months before the ticket at time t
52.432
26.919
11.809
8.840
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percent
0
1
2
≥ 3
The Number of Tickets Received Over the 48 Months Before the Incident
Notes: Figure shows the distribution of the number of tickets an individual has received before the speeding
incident that takes place at time t. Panel a (b) of the Figure shows the distribution of tickets received by
individuals over the 12 (48) months before the incident at time t. The dataset is the same as in the main
RDD analysis. Section 2.3 explains data construction.
58

=== PAGINA 60 ===
Figure A.21: Speeding Distributions at the Traffic Monitoring Station 145 with Speeding
Camera
(a) Full Distribution
0
.02
.04
.06
.08
Density
40
60
80
100
120
Speed
(b) Distribution Around the Income-based Fine Cutoff
0
.001
.002
.003
.004
.005
Density
-10
-5
0
5
10
Normalized Speed
Notes: The figure shows speed distributions at Traffic Monitoring Station 145, located on Ring Road 1,
which runs through Helsinki and Espoo. The station also has a police speeding camera. Panel A displays
the full speed distribution at the station, while Panel B focuses on the distribution around the income-based
fine cutoff.
59

=== PAGINA 61 ===
Figure A.22: Fines, RDD Estimates, and Reoffending Means by Speeding History
(a) Discontinuities in the Fine
0
50
100
150
200
250
Discontinuity in the Fine

Reoffenders
First-time offenders

Fine Discontinuity:
Reoffenders: 229.859 (13.856)
First-time offenders: 169.181 (7.753)
(b) RDD estimates
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
.02
RDD Estimates

Reoffenders
First-time offenders

RDD Estimates:
Reoffenders: -0.034 (0.014)
First-time offenders: -0.011 (0.011)
(c) Control Means
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
Mean Reoffending within 6 Months

Reoffenders
First-time offenders

Outcome Mean:
Reoffenders: 0.178
First-time offenders: 0.096
Notes: The figure presents discontinuities in fines, RDD estimates, and control means by speeding history.
Reoffenders are individuals who have received a speeding ticket during the past four years, while first-time
offenders have a clean speeding record. Panel (a) plots the discontinuity in the fine amount. Panel (b)
shows the estimated impact of the higher fine on reoffending within six months of the initial ticket. Panel
(c) displays the mean outcome in the control group. Vertical solid lines represent 95% confidence intervals.
Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
60

=== PAGINA 62 ===
Figure A.23: The Impact of Fine Size on Reoffending within 1-18 months.
(a) The Main Specification
-.08
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
.02
.04
RDD Estimate
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Months Since Speeding Ticket
95% Confidence Intervals
RDD Estimate
(b) Robustness to different Specifications
-.08
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
.02
.04
RDD Estimate
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Months since speeding ticket
Conventional RDD without controls
Conventional RDD with controls
Bias corrected RDD
Notes: Figure panel (a) plots the RDD estimates of βt obtained using Equation (2). Estimates plot the
impact of the higher fine on the cumulative probability of committing a traffic offense in t months after the
initial fine. The estimates are obtained using conventional local linear regression with a triangular kernel.
Vertical solid lines are the 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the individual
level. Figure panel (b) shows the robustness to different specifications. Sample construction and data as
defined in section 2.3.
61

=== PAGINA 63 ===
Figure A.24: Counterfactual Exercise
(a) Constant Treatment Effect
Fixed fine cutoff
Income-based fine cutoff 
.05
.1
.15
.2
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Normalized distance from the income-based fine cutoff (km/h)
Counterfactual
True Data
(b) Treatment Effect Diminishing in Speed
Fixed fine cutoff
Income-based fine cutoff 
.05
.1
.15
.2
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Normalized distance from the income-based fine cutoff (km/h)
Counterfactual
True Data
Notes: The Figure presents results from a counterfactual exercise. I generate the unobserved counterfactual
(triangles) by adding the treatment effect to the mean of the treatment group. Panel (a) assumes that
the treatment effect equals the RDD estimate after 6 months and is constant. Panel (b) assumes that the
treatment effect decreases by 20 percent per kilometer per hour as we move to the right from the cutoff.
The x-axis measures the distance from the income-based fine cutoff in km/h.
The y-axis refers to the
probability of committing another traffic offense within six months after the initial speeding ticket. Vertical
lines highlight the fine discontinuity points. The income-based (fixed) fine cutoff locates at 0 (-5). The
sample is constructed as the section 2.3 describes.
62

=== PAGINA 64 ===
Figure A.25: The Impact of Fine Size on Probability of Receiving another Income-based
Fine
(a) RDD estimates
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
.02
RDD Estimate
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Months Since Fine
Conventional RDD
Bias corrected RDD
(b) Control mean
0
.01
.02
.03
.04
.05
Cumulative recidivism probability
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Months since speeding ticket
Notes: Figure panel (a) plots the RDD estimates of βt obtained using Equation (2). Estimates plot the
impact of the higher fine on the cumulative probability of receiving an income-based fine in t months after
the initial fine. The estimates are obtained using conventional local linear regression with a triangular kernel.
Vertical solid lines are the 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the individual
level. Figure Panel (b) shows the mean of the outcome for the control group.
63

=== PAGINA 65 ===
Figure A.26: Graphical Evidence: Recidivism Within 3 ,6 ,9 ,12 Months
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
.25
-12-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0
2
4
6
8
After 3 months
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
.25
-12-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0
2
4
6
8
After 6 months
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
.25
-12-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0
2
4
6
8
After 9 months
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
.25
-12-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0
2
4
6
8
After 12 months
Notes: The figure presents a recidivism outcome as a function of normalized speed. The x-axis measures
the distance from the income-based fine cutoff in km/h. The y-axis refers to the probability of committing
another traffic offense within 3, 6, 9, and 12 months after the initial speeding ticket. Vertical lines highlight
the fine discontinuity points. The income-based (fixed) fine cutoff locates at 0 (-5). The sample is constructed
as the section 2.3 describes.
64

=== PAGINA 66 ===
Figure A.27: Distribution of Predicted Probability for Not Being in Speeding Sample
0
2
4
6
8
Density
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
P(Not Speeding)
All individuals with a car
Individuals in the Speeding ticket sample
Individuals in RDD sample
Notes: The figure shows the distribution of the predicted probability of not being included in the speeding
sample for the full population of car owners, for individuals in the speeding sample, and for the RDD sample.
To calculate the predicted probabilities, I use data on all car owners in Finland. Using a logit model and
the background characteristics listed in Appendix Table B.9, I estimate the predicted probability that an
individual is not included in the speeding sample.
Figure A.28: Geographical Variation in Monitoring Intensity
(0.244,1.811]
(0.146,0.244]
(0.091,0.146]
(0.059,0.091]
(0.034,0.059]
(0.020,0.034]
(0.011,0.020]
(0.004,0.011]
(0.000,0.004]
(0.000,0.000]
[0.000,0.000]
No data
Notes: Figure shows geographical variation in the monitoring intensity. The monitoring intensity is mea-
sured as the number of speeding tickets assigned by cameras in the municipality divided by the municipality’s
car-owning population. Red indicates more monitoring whereas blue less monitoring.
65

=== PAGINA 67 ===
B
Tables
Table B.1: The Punishment Schedule
Speed Limit
Violation (km/h)
Number of
Income Fines
Drift
Fixed Fine
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Speed limit ≤60 km/h
-10
-
-
170
10-15
-
-
170
16-20
-
-
200
21-23
12
8 - 16
-
24-26
14
10 - 18
-
27-29
16
12 - 20
-
30-32
18
14 - 22
-
33-35
20
16 - 24
-
36-38
22
18 - 26
-
39-41
24
20 - 28
-
42-44
26
22 - 30
-
45-47
28
24 - 32
-
Panel B: Speed limit > 60 km/h
-10
-
-
140
10-15
-
-
140
16-20
-
-
200
21-23
10
6-14
-
24-26
12
8-16
-
27-29
14
10-18
-
30-32
16
12-20
-
33-35
18
14-22
-
36-38
20
16-24
-
39-41
22
18-26
-
42-44
24
20-28
-
45-47
26
22-30
-
48-50
28
24-32
-
Notes: The table shows the punishment schedule Finnish Police used during my study period.
Column (1) shows the speeding limit violation in km/h. Column (2) presents the recommended
number of income-based fines police assign for a given violation. Column(3) shows the recom-
mended range for the number of income-based. Column (4) indicates the size of the possible
fixed fine in euros.
66

=== PAGINA 68 ===
Table B.2: Descriptive Statistics and Balance check when limit zone 80 km/h is included
All
Window +-3
RDD
CCT RDD
Mean
Mean
RDD
RDD
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Traffic offence, months t-1 to t-6
0.121
0.135
0.007
0.010
(0.009)
(0.011)
Non-Traffic offence, months t-1 to t-6
0.014
0.020
-0.001
-0.002
(0.004)
(0.005)
Employed
0.702
0.703
0.002
0.002
(0.011)
(0.014)
Unemployed
0.032
0.037
0.011
0.014
(0.005)
(0.006)
Outside the Labor Force
0.265
0.260
-0.016
-0.019
(0.011)
(0.014)
Monthly Net Income
2,578.336
2,579.275
-23.047
-3.049
(41.784)
(51.460)
Primary Education
0.164
0.168
0.009
0.011
(0.009)
(0.011)
Secondary Education
0.439
0.444
-0.013
-0.017
(0.012)
(0.015)
Tertiary Education
0.397
0.389
0.003
0.005
(0.011)
(0.014)
Female
0.328
0.292
-0.012
-0.017
(0.011)
(0.013)
Age
47.313
46.053
-0.758
-0.572
(0.387)
(0.454)
N of Children
0.829
0.839
0.032
0.043
(0.029)
(0.037)
Finnish Speaking
0.893
0.891
0.021
0.024
(0.008)
(0.010)
Married
0.499
0.483
0.008
0.014
(0.013)
(0.015)
Urban Municipality
0.719
0.716
0.017
0.023
(0.012)
(0.014)
Semi-urban Municipality
0.161
0.163
-0.017
-0.021
(0.008)
(0.010)
Rural Municipality
0.120
0.121
-0.001
-0.005
(0.009)
(0.011)
Capital Region
0.324
0.295
0.008
0.009
(0.011)
(0.014)
Observations
504,529
31,891
Notes: The table shows the predetermined characteristics of individuals in the speeding ticket sample and results
from balance checks when a limit zone of 80 km/h is included. Column (1) shows the means of background
variables in the estimation sample. Column (2) presents the means of background variables in the estimation
sample after I restrict it to individuals within +-3 km/h from the income-based cutoff. Column 3 shows results
from the balance check where the dependent variable is a predetermined characteristic. The column reports the
estimates of β that I obtain using the equation 2. Column 4 reports results from the balance check I conduct
using the approach of Calonico et al. (2014a). I cluster standard errors at the individual level.
67

=== PAGINA 69 ===
Table B.3: Balance check at the 15 Km/H cutoff - all limits included
Dep. Var
All
Window +-3
Conv. RD
CCT RDD
Mean
Mean
RDD
RDD
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Traffic offence, months t-1 to t-6
0.120
0.123
0.007
0.008
(0.004)
(0.006)
Non-Traffic offence, months t-1 to t-6
0.014
0.015
-0.001
0.000
(0.002)
(0.002)
Employed
0.702
0.698
-0.002
0.002
(0.006)
(0.009)
Unemployed
0.032
0.034
-0.002
-0.002
(0.002)
(0.003)
Outside the Labor Force
0.266
0.268
0.004
0.001
(0.006)
(0.008)
Monthly Net Income
2,583.490
2,576.056
25.851
39.616
(22.282)
(30.629)
Primary Education
0.163
0.162
-0.004
-0.006
(0.005)
(0.007)
Secondary Education
0.438
0.438
-0.000
0.001
(0.007)
(0.009)
Tertiary Education
0.399
0.400
0.004
0.005
(0.007)
(0.009)
Female
0.329
0.313
-0.002
0.005
(0.006)
(0.009)
Age
47.442
47.106
0.094
-0.150
(0.221)
(0.297)
N of Children
0.828
0.824
0.008
0.026
(0.017)
(0.022)
Finnish Speaking
0.894
0.893
0.007
0.008
(0.004)
(0.006)
Married
0.501
0.500
0.008
0.007
(0.007)
(0.009)
Urban Municipality
0.719
0.717
-0.013
-0.019
(0.007)
(0.009)
Semi-urban Municipality
0.161
0.162
0.008
0.014
(0.005)
(0.007)
Rural Municipality
0.120
0.121
0.003
0.004
(0.005)
(0.006)
Capital Region
0.325
0.310
0.004
0.008
(0.006)
(0.009)
Observations
483,866
117,397
Notes: The table shows the predetermined characteristics of individuals in the speeding ticket sample and results
from the balance checks from the fixed fine cutoff when all limit zones are included. Column (1) shows the means
of background variables in the estimation sample. Column (2) presents the means of background variables in the
estimation sample after I restrict it to individuals within +-3 km/h from the fixed fine cutoff.
Column 3 shows
results from the balance check where the dependent variable is a predetermined characteristic. The column reports
the estimates of β that I obtain using the equation 2. Column 4 reports results from the balance check I conduct
using the approach of Calonico et al. (2014a). I cluster standard errors at the individual level.
68

=== PAGINA 70 ===
Table B.4: Balance check at the 15 Km/H cutoff - limit 80 Km/H omitted
Dep. Var
All
Window +-3
Conv. RD
CCT RDD
Mean
Mean
RDD
RDD
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Traffic offence, months t-1 to t-6
0.121
0.126
0.003
0.004
(0.006)
(0.008)
Non-Traffic offence, months t-1 to t-6
0.013
0.014
-0.002
-0.002
(0.002)
(0.003)
Employed
0.706
0.704
-0.001
-0.001
(0.008)
(0.010)
Unemployed
0.031
0.034
-0.004
-0.005
(0.003)
(0.004)
Outside the Labor Force
0.262
0.262
0.005
0.006
(0.007)
(0.010)
Monthly Net Income
2,596.016
2,580.653
36.021
54.022
(27.778)
(38.068)
Primary Education Only
0.163
0.163
-0.004
-0.008
(0.006)
(0.008)
Secondary Education Only
0.434
0.437
0.011
0.012
(0.009)
(0.012)
Tertiary Education Only
0.404
0.400
-0.006
-0.004
(0.008)
(0.011)
Female
0.332
0.317
-0.003
-0.000
(0.008)
(0.011)
Age
47.436
46.940
0.345
0.264
(0.259)
(0.361)
N of Children
0.832
0.837
-0.030
-0.022
(0.020)
(0.027)
Finnish Speaking
0.887
0.884
0.012
0.017
(0.005)
(0.007)
Married
0.504
0.497
0.006
0.005
(0.008)
(0.011)
Urban Municipality
0.730
0.718
-0.016
-0.023
(0.008)
(0.010)
Semi-urban Municipality
0.160
0.165
0.006
0.010
(0.006)
(0.009)
Rural municipality
0.111
0.117
0.009
0.008
(0.006)
(0.008)
Capital region
0.340
0.324
0.004
0.002
(0.008)
(0.011)
Observations
322,734
74,315
Notes: The table shows the predetermined characteristics of individuals in the speeding ticket sample and results
from the balance checks from the fixed fine cutoff when 80 km/h limit zone is omitted. Column (1) shows the means
of background variables in the estimation sample. Column (2) presents the means of background variables in the
estimation sample after I restrict it to individuals within +-3 km/h from the fixed fine cutoff.
Column 3 shows
results from the balance check where the dependent variable is a predetermined characteristic. The column reports
the estimates of β that I obtain using the equation 2. Column 4 reports results from the balance check I conduct
using the approach of Calonico et al. (2014a). I cluster standard errors at the individual level.
69

=== PAGINA 71 ===
Table B.5: The RDD estimates from the Income-based Fine Cutoff
(Limit 80 km/h Included)
Dep. variable: P(Traffic offence between time 1 and t )
Time (t)
Mean
RDD
RDD
RDD
BW
Obs.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
1
0.029
-0.005
-0.005
-0.007
3
31,891
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.006)
2
0.058
-0.010
-0.011
-0.013
3
31,891
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.008)
3
0.081
-0.017
-0.018
-0.021
3
31,891
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.009)
4
0.105
-0.021
-0.021
-0.024
3
31,891
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.009)
5
0.123
-0.025
-0.027
-0.030
3
31,891
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.010)
6
0.140
-0.019
-0.020
-0.022
4
49,499
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.011)
7
0.158
-0.019
-0.020
-0.022
4
47,672
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.010)
8
0.176
-0.020
-0.021
-0.024
4
45,324
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.012)
9
0.195
-0.025
-0.027
-0.030
3
26,879
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.014)
10
0.213
-0.022
-0.023
-0.026
3
25,110
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.015)
11
0.229
-0.015
-0.016
-0.019
4
37,995
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.015)
12
0.248
-0.017
-0.019
-0.021
4
35,008
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.017)
Notes: The table shows the RDD estimates from the income-based fine cutoff
when the limit zone of 80 km/h is not omitted. The outcome is the probability
that an individual commits another traffic offense 1 to t months after the initial
speeding ticket.
Column (2) shows the mean of the outcome for those just
on the left-hand side of the cutoff.
Column (3) presents the RDD estimates
obtained using equation 2. Column (4) shows results from a similar analysis
but with controls. Column (5) reports biased corrected RDD estimates obtained
using the robust approach by Calonico et al. (2014b). Column (6) shows the
bandwidth selected using methods of Calonico et al. (2014b). Column (7) shows
the number of observations.
In columns (3) and (4), standard errors in the
parentheses are clustered at the individual level. For bias-corrected estimates,
the confidence intervals are given by the approach of Calonico et al. (2014b).
Sample construction and data as defined in Section 2.3.
70

=== PAGINA 72 ===
Table B.6: The RDD estimates from the fixed fine cutoff (15 km/h) when
the limit 80 km/h is omitted
Dep. variable: P(Traffic offence between time 1 and t)
Time (t)
Mean
RDD
RDD
RDD
BW
BW Obs.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
1
0.025
0.000
0.000
0.001
3
74,315
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.004)
2
0.051
-0.004
-0.004
-0.004
3
74,315
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.005)
3
0.071
-0.006
-0.006
-0.007
3
74,315
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.006)
4
0.092
-0.006
-0.006
-0.008
3
74,315
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.007)
5
0.113
-0.010
-0.009
-0.012
3
74,315
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.007)
6
0.130
-0.011
-0.010
-0.013
3
71,836
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.008)
7
0.146
-0.008
-0.008
-0.010
3
68,829
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.008)
8
0.161
-0.010
-0.010
-0.012
3
65,789
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.009)
9
0.176
-0.010
-0.010
-0.011
3
62,138
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.009)
10
0.192
-0.005
-0.005
-0.007
3
57,679
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.010)
11
0.209
-0.005
-0.005
-0.008
3
54,635
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.011)
12
0.227
-0.006
-0.005
-0.011
3
50,517
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.012)
Controls

CCT Estimator

Notes:
The table shows the main RDD estimates from the fixed fine cutoff when the
limit zone of 80 km/h is omitted.
The outcome is the probability that an individual
commits another traffic offense 1 to t months after the initial speeding ticket. Column
(2) shows the mean of the outcome for those just on the left-hand side of the cutoff.
Column (3) presents the RDD estimates obtained using equation 2. Column (4) shows
results from a similar analysis but with controls.
Column (5) reports biased corrected
RDD estimates obtained using the robust approach by Calonico et al. (2014b).Column (6)
shows the bandwidth selected using methods of Calonico et al. (2014b). Column (7) shows
the number of observations. In columns (3) and (4), standard errors in the parentheses are
clustered at the individual level. For bias-corrected estimates, the confidence intervals are
given by the approach of Calonico et al. (2014b). Sample construction and data as defined
in Section 2.3.
71

=== PAGINA 73 ===
Table B.7: The RDD estimates from the fixed fine cutoff (15 km/h)
when the limit 80 km/h is included
Dep. variable: P(Traffic offence between time 1 and t)
Time (t)
Mean
RDD
RDD
RDD
BW
Obs
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
1
0.026
0.000
0.000
0.001
3
117,397
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.003)
2
0.050
-0.003
-0.003
-0.002
3
117,397
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.004)
3
0.072
-0.003
-0.003
-0.004
3
117,397
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.005)
4
0.092
-0.005
-0.005
-0.007
3
117,397
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.005)
5
0.112
-0.007
-0.007
-0.010
3
117,397
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.006)
6
0.130
-0.008
-0.009
-0.010
3
113,491
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.006)
7
0.146
-0.007
-0.008
-0.008
3
109,060
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.007)
8
0.161
-0.009
-0.010
-0.010
3
103,572
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.007)
9
0.177
-0.012
-0.012
-0.013
3
98,174
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.008)
10
0.194
-0.011
-0.011
-0.012
3
91,795
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.008)
11
0.209
-0.009
-0.010
-0.011
3
86,640
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.009)
12
0.228
-0.010
-0.010
-0.012
3
79,904
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.009)
Controls

CCT Estimator

Notes: The table shows the main RDD estimates from the fixed fine cutoff when the
limit zone of 80 km/h is not omitted. The outcome is the probability that an individual
commits another traffic offense 1 to t months after the initial speeding ticket. Column
(2) shows the mean of the outcome for those just on the left-hand side of the cutoff.
Column (3) presents the RDD estimates obtained using equation 2. Column (4) shows
results from a similar analysis but with controls. Column (5) reports biased corrected
RDD estimates obtained using the robust approach by Calonico et al. (2014b).Column
(6) shows the bandwidth selected using methods of Calonico et al. (2014b). Column
(7) shows the number of observations.
In columns (3) and (4), standard errors in
the parentheses are clustered at the individual level. For bias-corrected estimates, the
confidence intervals are given by the approach of Calonico et al. (2014b).
Sample
construction and data as defined in Section 2.3.
72

=== PAGINA 74 ===
Table B.8: RDD Specification Check
Dep. Variable
RDD
RDD
CCT
RDD
RDD
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Jump in fines
200.962
204.113
213.353
211.698
161.558
(8.129)
(7.427)
(9.814)
(11.717)
(4.476)
P(Reoffending)
-0.021
-0.022
-0.028
-0.034
-0.022
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.015)
(0.009)
Controls




Polynomial

Weighted

Bandwidth
4
4
4
4
4
Mean at the left side
0.137
0.137
0.137
0.137
0.137
Observations
31,912
31,912
31,912
31,912
31,912
Notes: The table shows the RDD estimates with different specifications. In the first row,
the outcome is the total amount of fines. In the second row, the outcome is the probability
of reoffending within six months. Column (1) shows the main RDD estimates obtained
using equation 2. Column (2) presents results when controls are added to the specification.
Column (3) shows the results obtained using the approach of Calonico et al. (2014b). Col-
umn (4) shows results when I add a quadratic term to the RDD specification. Column (5)
reports weighted RDD estimates based on a sample reweighted to match the characteristics
of car owners who did not receive tickets. Standard errors clustered at the individual level.
Sample construction and data as defined in Section 2.3
73

=== PAGINA 75 ===
Table B.9: Summary Statistics for Car Holders
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Full population
Non-Speeders
Speeders
RDD
Employed
0.613
0.605
0.702
0.707
(0.487)
(0.489)
(0.457)
(0.455)
Unemployed
0.0226
0.0228
0.0324
0.0372
(0.149)
(0.149)
(0.177)
(0.189)
Outside the Labor Force
0.364
0.372
0.265
0.256
(0.481)
(0.483)
(0.441)
(0.436)
Monthly Net Income
2335.4
2301.5
2634.0
2625.4
(1388.8)
(1351.8)
(1728.7)
(1749.3)
Primary Education
0.185
0.188
0.164
0.169
(0.388)
(0.390)
(0.370)
(0.375)
Secondary Education
0.454
0.455
0.439
0.440
(0.498)
(0.498)
(0.496)
(0.496)
Tertiary Education
0.361
0.357
0.397
0.391
(0.480)
(0.479)
(0.489)
(0.488)
Female
0.378
0.385
0.328
0.299
(0.485)
(0.487)
(0.469)
(0.458)
Age
51.02
51.23
47.31
46.16
(16.76)
(16.87)
(15.70)
(15.90)
N of Children
0.667
0.654
0.829
0.842
(1.060)
(1.049)
(1.183)
(1.211)
Finnish Speaking
0.907
0.907
0.893
0.883
(0.291)
(0.290)
(0.310)
(0.321)
Married
0.496
0.495
0.499
0.485
(0.500)
(0.500)
(0.500)
(0.500)
Urban Municipality
0.665
0.661
0.719
0.714
(0.472)
(0.473)
(0.449)
(0.452)
Semi-urban Municipality
0.181
0.182
0.161
0.166
(0.385)
(0.386)
(0.367)
(0.372)
Rural Municipality
0.155
0.157
0.120
0.120
(0.362)
(0.364)
(0.325)
(0.325)
Capital region
0.253
0.248
0.324
0.307
(0.435)
(0.432)
(0.468)
(0.461)
Ticket within 2 years
0.186
0.173
0.322
0.338
(0.389)
(0.378)
(0.467)
(0.473)
N
5,030,724
4,610,502
504,776
31,912
Notes: The table reports descriptive statistics for the full population of car owners between 2017-
2018 (column 1), for individuals who have a car but are not in the speeding ticket sample (column 2),
for individuals in the speeding sample (column 3), and for individuals in the RDD sample (column
4).
74

=== PAGINA 76 ===
Table B.10: Monitoring Intensity and Recidivism
Low Monitoring
Mod. Monitoring
High Monitoring
Dep. Variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A.
Jump in fines
208.177
210.043
213.221
218.010
182.171
186.483
(17.273)
(16.087)
(13.564)
(12.149)
(9.227)
(7.835)
Panel B.
P(Reoffending)
-0.005
-0.006
-0.046
-0.046
-0.015
-0.017
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.016)
Controls



Mean at the left side
0.124
0.124
0.158
0.158
0.130
0.130
Observations
11,428
11,428
10,120
10,120
10,364
10,364
Notes: The table presents the relationship between municipal monitoring intensity and recidivism. The
monitoring intensity is measured as the number of speeding tickets assigned in a municipality divided by
the municipality’s car-owning population, averaged over 2018-2019. Individuals in the speeding sample are
divided into monitoring tertiles based on the intensity in their home municipality: columns 1-2 represent low
monitoring regions, columns 3-4 moderate monitoring regions, and columns 5-6 high monitoring regions.
Panel A shows the fine jump at the cutoff. Panel B shows the impact on recidivism 6 months after the
initial ticket. All estimates are obtained using Equation 2. Standard errors are clustered at the individual
level. Section 2.3 details the sample construction.
75

=== PAGINA 77 ===
Table B.11: Descriptive Statistics by Speeding History
All
First-time offenders
Reoffenders
(1)
(2)
(3)
Employed
0.706
0.677
0.739
(0.456)
(0.468)
(0.439)
Unemployed
0.032
0.039
0.024
(0.177)
(0.195)
(0.154)
Outside the Labor Force
0.262
0.284
0.237
(0.440)
(0.451)
(0.425)
Monthly Net Income
2,589.741
2,389.260
2,810.723
(1,657.788)
(1,477.326)
(1,810.737)
Primary Education
0.164
0.163
0.164
(0.370)
(0.370)
(0.370)
Secondary Education
0.434
0.436
0.432
(0.496)
(0.496)
(0.495)
Tertiary Education
0.402
0.400
0.404
(0.490)
(0.490)
(0.491)
Female
0.331
0.385
0.271
(0.470)
(0.487)
(0.444)
Age
47.296
47.482
47.091
(15.626)
(16.260)
(14.893)
N of Children
0.834
0.803
0.868
(1.184)
(1.154)
(1.215)
Finnish Speaking
0.886
0.888
0.885
(0.318)
(0.316)
(0.319)
Married
0.501
0.505
0.497
(0.500)
(0.500)
(0.500)
Urban Municipality
0.729
0.728
0.730
(0.444)
(0.445)
(0.444)
Semi-urban Municipality
0.160
0.159
0.161
(0.366)
(0.365)
(0.368)
Rural Municipality
0.111
0.113
0.109
(0.314)
(0.317)
(0.312)
Capital Region
0.338
0.320
0.358
(0.473)
(0.467)
(0.479)
Observations
338,191
177,321
160,870
Notes:
The table reports descriptive statistics for the full sample, reoffenders, and first-time
offenders. Reoffenders are individuals who received a speeding ticket at some point in the past four
years, while first-time offenders have a clean speeding history. Standard deviations are reported
in parentheses.
76

=== PAGINA 78 ===
Table B.12: Regression Discontinuity Design Estimates by Income Change
Income change ≥0
Income change < 0
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A. Impact on Fine
206.642
209.528
183.499
187.478
(10.321)
(9.400)
(9.401)
(8.239)
Panel B. Impact on Recidivism
-0.027
-0.028
-0.002
-0.001
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.019)
(0.018)
Controls


N
23,685
23,685
8,227
8,227
Notes: The table reports results by past income growth. Columns (1) - (2) show the RDD estimates for
the individuals who have experienced weakly positive income growth between periods t −3, 4 and t −1, 2.
Columns (3) - (4) show the RDD estimates for the individuals who have experienced negative income
growth between periods t −3, 4 and t −1, 2. Panel A shows the discontinuity in fines at the income-based
fine cutoff. Panel B presents the effect on reoffending six months after the initial ticket. Columns (2) and
(4) show the estimates with controls. Section 2 describes the sample construction.
Table B.13: The Impact of Fine Size on Accidents
RDD
RDD
(1)
(2)
0.002
0.002
(0.002)
(0.002)
Controls

Outcome mean
0.005
0.005
Bandwidth
4
4
Observations
31,912
31,912
Notes: The table reports results from an RDD analysis
where the outcome is the probability of being involved in
a traffic accident as a driver within six months of receiving
a speeding ticket. Estimates are obtained using Equation
(2). Column (1) reports estimates without controls, and
Column (2) reports estimates with controls. The sample
construction is detailed in Section 2.3.
77

=== PAGINA 79 ===
C
Theory Appendix
C.1
Proofs for the Model with Misperception
Proof of Proposition 1
Proof. Individuals solve
max
xt EUt = u(xt, θ) −p · ˆft(x) · xt.
The first order condition giving the optimal speed x∗is
∂u(x, θ)/∂x −p · ∂ˆft(x, θ)/∂x = 0
(6)
since drivers ignore the discontinuity and use a linear approximation of the penalty
function. Thus, all individuals locate in their interior optimum where the equation 6 holds.
Because θ has a continuous distribution, the speed distribution will be continuous, implying
that there exists zero excess mass at the cutoff xh
Proof of Proposition 2
Proof. Individuals solve
max
xt EUt = u(xt, θ) −p · ˆft(x) · xt.
where ˆft(x) = βx + fl1[x > 0]} is individuals’ perceived penalty function at time
t.
The slope β is an unknown random variable and according to an individual’s prior
beliefs β ∼N[µβ, τ −1
β ]. The known constant equals a low fine fl. When an individual
is caught, she receives a fine that they interpret as a signal. The signal takes the form
st = βf
t + ηt, η ∼N[µs, τ −1
s ]. If speed is higher than xh, then the individual receives a large
fine (βh
t ). Otherwise, βf
t is βl
t. The posterior is given by: ˆβ = τβµβ+τss
τβ+τs
Proof of Proposition 3
Proof. The optimization problem may be stated as
max
x
EU = θx −x2
2 −ˆβ · x.
Note, I have dropped the time subscript since I am considering the steady state. The
78

=== PAGINA 80 ===
true penalty function is
f(x) =









0 if x = 0
fl if 0 < x ≤xh
fh if x > xh.
(7)
If actions converge, they converge to a steady state where two conditions have to hold.
First order condition:
θ −x∗−β = 0
(8)
Surprise function:
Γ(x) = f(x∗) −ˆf(x∗) = 0,
(9)
where ˆf(x) = βx+fl1[x > 0]. Equation 8 is just a standard first order condition. Equation
9 implies that in the steady state the fine individual receives has to be equal to the predicted
one. Otherwise, she will update the penalty function, and hence, the selected speed can
not be a steady state. In other words, the steady state has to locate in a place where the
perceived penalty function and the true penalty function cross.
We can combine equations 8 and 9 to obtain
θ = x∗+ fh −fl
x∗
1[x > xh]
(10)
It follows directly from equation 10 and continuity of types that there is a continuum of
types whose beliefs do not converge, and follow cycles. Note that θl is a type whose optimal
speed is exactly at xh
C.2
Becker Model with Income-Based Fines
This theoretical section builds partly on Mello (2024) to illustrate how income-based fines
affect low- and high-income individuals.
In the model, individuals choose to speed if the expected utility of doing so exceeds that
of abstaining
pu(y −f) + (1 −p)(u(y) + s) > u(y)
(11)
where f is the fine, p is the detection probability, y is the exogenous income, and s stands
for the utility arising from speeding. The utility from speeding, s, varies across individuals
according to a distribution with a cumulative distribution function G.
The ”taste” for
speeding is not correlated with income.
I assume that the utility function satisfies the
standard properties that ∂u/∂y > 0, ∂2u/∂y < 0.
By rearranging equation 11, we can derive ”the crime demand function,” which takes
79

=== PAGINA 81 ===
the following form:
s∗(p, y, f) =
p
1 −p[u(y) −u(y −f)].
(12)
The equation 12 defines the cutoff value s∗, which dictates whether an individual engages
in speeding. If an individual’s private gain (willingness to pay) si is larger than the cutoff
value s∗, the individual commits a crime and vice versa.
The cutoff has the following properties:
∂s∗/∂f > 0,
∂s∗/∂p > 0,
∂s∗/∂y < 0.
The cutoff increases with fine size and detection probability, meaning speeding becomes
less likely as either increases.
Conversely, the cutoff decreases with income due to the
concavity of the utility function.
As income rises, the marginal utility of income falls,
making individuals more willing to risk financial penalties. This property makes higher-
income individuals more likely to speed even when speeding preferences are distributed
similarly across the population.
CRRA utility function
Next, I will illustrate how an individual’s cutoff value s∗changes
if there is a discontinuous change in the fine. To do this, I will assume that individuals have
a constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility function of the following form
u(y) =





y1−η
1 −η
if η > 0, η̸ = 1,
ln y
if η = 1
where η is the relative risk aversion parameter and is larger than 0 due to risk aversion.
With the CRRA utility function, the cutoff becomes
s∗(p, y, f) =







p
1 −p
y1−η −(y −f)1−η
1 −η
,
if η > 0, η̸ = 1,
p
1 −p
 ln y −ln(y −f)

,
if η = 1.
(13)
With this structure, I will next illustrate how the cutoff value s∗changes at the income-
based fine threshold for different income groups and different levels of risk aversion. In
this exercise, I assume a penalty schedule similar to that in Finland, with the size of the
income-based fine is determined by equation 1.
80

=== PAGINA 82 ===
Changes in s∗at the Income-based fine threshold
Appendix Figure C.29 illustrates
how the cutoff value s∗varies with income and risk aversion parameter η at the income-
based fine threshold. Panel (a) depicts the case of near risk neutrality (η = 0.01), where
s∗is uniform across income deciles under fixed fines but increases sharply for high-income
individuals once fines become income-dependent. This suggests that income disparities in
speeding would emerge only at speeds above the income-based threshold under near risk
neutrality.
As risk aversion increases across panels (b)-(d), the relationship between income and
deterrence changes systematically. At moderate risk aversion (η = 0.5), fixed fines deter
low-income individuals more strongly than high-income individuals. Yet the substantial
jump in fine magnitudes at the threshold still creates stronger deterrence for high-income
individuals in the income-based regime.
When risk aversion reaches η = 1.1 (panel c),
income-based fines generate approximately equal deterrence across income groups. At very
high risk aversion (η = 6, panel d), the cutoff value increases less dramatically for high-
income individuals than for low-income individuals at the threshold, potentially reversing
the relative deterrence effects across income groups.
Furthermore, using s∗, we can consider how large the jump in the fine has to be for
high-income individuals so that low- and high-income people experience a similar absolute
change in s∗at the income-based fine threshold. Define the change in s∗for a high-income
person as a
∆s∗
h =
p
1 −p
(y1−η
h
−(yh −fhh)1−η) −(y1−η
h
−(yh −f)1−η)
1 −η
where yh is the income of high-income person, f is the fixed fine, and fhh is the income-
based fine for high-income person. A fine system that would create a similar jump in the
s∗at the threshold would satisfy the following condition
∆s∗
h −∆s∗
l = 0
(14)
=

(yh −f)1−η −(yh −fhh)1−η
−

(yl −f)1−η −(yl −flh)1−η
(15)
where yl is the income of low-income person and flh is the income-based fine for low-
income person. From equation 15 we can solve for fhh
fhh = yh −
h
(yh −f)1−η −(yl −f)1−η + (yl −flh)1−ηi
1
1−η
(16)
81

=== PAGINA 83 ===
In Appendix Figure C.30, I apply equation 16 to demonstrate how fine magnitudes must
increase for high-income individuals to produce equivalent absolute changes in s∗across
income groups. The illustration compares individuals from the 3rd income decile (€ 1594
monthly income) with those from the top decile (€ 5172 monthly income). For low-income
individuals, fines increase by approximately € 20 at the cutoff.
The figure maps the relationship between risk aversion parameters and required fine
magnitudes for high-income individuals that would generate equivalent discontinuities in s∗
across income groups. Under minimal risk aversion, where utility is approximately linear
in income, the fines required for high- and low-income individuals become nearly identical.
When η = 1, which aligns with average estimates in the empirical literature (Elmine-
jad et al., 2025), a fine increase of approximately € 80 for high-income individuals would
generate the same utility loss as a € 20 increase for low-income individuals.
In contrast, if we assume that the goal of the policy would be to impose similar expected
utility loss across income groups at the income-based fine threshold, the current Finnish
system implies a much higher degree of risk aversion.
The vertical dashed line in Ap-
pendix Figure C.30 shows that when η = 2.7, the actual € 800 fine increase for high-income
individuals yields utility effects equivalent to the € 20 increase for low-income individuals.
Figure C.29: Speeding cutoff, Income-based fines and Risk Aversion
(a) η = 0.01
s
 ∗ 
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Distance from the Income-based Threshold
3rd Income Decile (1594 Euros)
4th Income Decile (1873 Euros)
5th Income Decile (2085 Euros)
6th Income Decile (2286 Euros)
7th Income Decile (2516 Euros)
8th Income Decile (2815 Euros)
9th Income Decile (3293 Euros)
10th Income Decile (5172 Euros)
(b) η = 0.5
s
 ∗ 
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Distance from the Income-based Threshold
3rd Income Decile (1594 Euros)
4th Income Decile (1873 Euros)
5th Income Decile (2085 Euros)
6th Income Decile (2286 Euros)
7th Income Decile (2516 Euros)
8th Income Decile (2815 Euros)
9th Income Decile (3293 Euros)
10th Income Decile (5172 Euros)
(c) η = 1.1
s
 ∗ 
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Distance from the Income-based Threshold
3rd Income Decile (1594 Euros)
4th Income Decile (1873 Euros)
5th Income Decile (2085 Euros)
6th Income Decile (2286 Euros)
7th Income Decile (2516 Euros)
8th Income Decile (2815 Euros)
9th Income Decile (3293 Euros)
10th Income Decile (5172 Euros)
(d) η = 6
s
 ∗ 
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Distance from the Income-based Threshold
3rd Income Decile (1594 Euros)
4th Income Decile (1873 Euros)
5th Income Decile (2085 Euros)
6th Income Decile (2286 Euros)
7th Income Decile (2516 Euros)
8th Income Decile (2815 Euros)
9th Income Decile (3293 Euros)
10th Income Decile (5172 Euros)
Notes: The figure plots how the expected utility cost of fines changes at the income-based fine threshold
across different income groups, using equation 13.
82

=== PAGINA 84 ===
Figure C.30: Risk Aversion and Size of the Fine for High-income Group
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Fine for the High Income Individual
0
1
2
3
4
η (relative risk aversion parameter)
Notes:
The figure uses equation 16 to demonstrate how fine magnitudes must increase for high-income
individuals to yield equivalent expected utility losses at the income-based fine cutoff, across income groups
with varying levels of risk aversion. The illustration compares individuals in the third income decile (€ 1,594
monthly income) to those in the top decile (€ 5172 monthly income).
For low-income individuals, fines
increase by approximately € 20 at the threshold. The vertical dashed line indicates the level of risk aversion
at which the current Finnish income-based fine system produces a similar change in expected utility at the
income-based fine threshold for low- and high-income groups.
83

=== PAGINA 85 ===
C.3
Optimal Nonlinear Income-based Fines
This section derives the optimal fine rate following the approach of Saez (2001) and Diamond
(1975).
Suppose we have an economy with individuals whose earnings z are determined exoge-
nously with a cumulative distribution function H(z). The economy’s population is normal-
ized to one. Individuals spend their income either on speeding s or consumption c. Speeding
is a binary decision. Individuals have a taste for speeding ϵ drawn from a distribution with
a cumulative distribution function G. Fines are proportional to income, denoted by τ(z).
If an individual’s taste for speed exceeds the fine, they will speed and cause society fiscal
cost e. Further, each individual i has a quasilinear utility function ui(c, s).
The government chooses a nonlinear income-based fine schedule τ(z) to maximize the
social welfare function
SWF =
Z
ωiG(ui(ci, si))dH(z)
subject to
Z
τ(zi)dH(z) = R
in which R is equal to the total revenue, ωi are pareto weights, and G(·) is the social
welfare function. We can also define for each individual i a welfare weight that is equal to
gi = G′(ui)ui
c
λ
where λ stands for the multiplier of the government budget constraint.
Welfare Effects of a Small Fine Change
Suppose that the government increases the
fine by dτ for individuals with earnings z∗but does not change the fine in other parts of
the distribution. Since the change in the fine is small, there are no first-order behavioral
impacts on utility due to the envelope theorem. However, the fine hike will affect individuals
in four other ways.
Consumer utility
First, there is a mechanical effect on the utility of individuals whose
income is at z∗and who engage in speeding. This means that the government takes dτ
from individuals with income z∗and who are speeding s(z∗) and weights this with g(z∗).
In total, this mechanical utility loss is equal to
Change in consumer utility dU: −g(z∗)s(z∗)dτ · h(z∗).
Government revenue
Second, the hike will have a mechanical impact on the govern-
ment’s revenue by raising dτ from everyone with incomes at z∗and who engage in speeding.
This revenue change will be equal to s(z∗)dτ · h(z∗). Third, the fine hike will decrease rev-
84

=== PAGINA 86 ===
enue through a behavioral response. This means that some individuals with earnings z∗will
reduce speeding as speeding gets more expensive, which decreases the government’s revenue
from fines. Finally, the marginal increase in fines (dτ) will deter speeding ( ∂s
∂τ ), which will
decrease the fiscal cost (e) arising from speeding. The total impact on the government’s
revenue will be
dR = s(z∗)dτ · h(z∗) −τ(z∗) ∂s
∂τ dτ · h(z∗) + e∂s
∂τ dτ · h(z∗)
Optimal Fine at z∗
As we consider a small change in fine rate, at the optimum, the
total change in welfare will be zero dW = dU + dR = 0 which can be written as
dW = (1 −g(z∗))s(z∗)dτ · h(z∗) −τ(z∗) ∂s
∂τ dτ · h(z∗) + e∂s
∂τ dτ · h(z∗) = 0.
(17)
We can rearrange 17 to derive a formula for the fine rate
τ(z∗) =
e
|{z}
Fiscal cost of Externality
+
Net social value of transfers
z
}|
{
(1 −g(z∗))s(z∗)
∂s
∂τ
(18)
The equation 18 reveals three things. First, if the government does not want redistribu-
tion through fines or there is no income inequality in the economy, the optimal marginal fine
equals the externality. Second, fines can be higher than the externality if the government
wants to conduct redistribution using fines. This is captured by the numerator of the second
term in the equation 18. Finally, behavioral responses to the fines are also important. This
is captured by the denominator of the last term, which is equal to the semi-elasticity of
speeding with respect to fines. If demand for speeding is very elastic, meaning the elasticity
is high, fines are not a very good way to conduct redistribution. In contrast, if demand is
inelastic, fines are an efficient way to collect and redistribute money.
85
