
=== PAGINA 1 ===

455 Golden Gate Avenue 
San Francisco, CA 94102-3688 
Tel. 415-865-4200 
Fax 415-865-4205 
www.courts.ca.gov 

HON. PATRICIA GUERRERO 
Chief Justice of California 
Chair of the Judicial Council 

HON. MARSHA G. SLOUGH 
Chair, Executive and Planning Committee 

HON. DAVID M. RUBIN 
Chair, Judicial Branch Budget Committee 
Chair, Litigation Management Committee 

HON. MARLA O. ANDERSON 
Chair, Legislation Committee 

HON. CARIN T. FUJISAKI 
Chair, Rules Committee 

HON. KYLE S. BRODIE 
Chair, Technology Committee 

Hon. Maria Lucy Armendariz 
Hon. C. Todd Bottke 
Hon. Kevin C. Brazile 
Hon. Jonathan B. Conklin  
Hon. Carol A. Corrigan 
Hon. Samuel K. Feng 
Mr. David D. Fu 
Hon. Brad R. Hill 
Ms. Rachel W. Hill 
Hon. Harold W. Hopp 
Hon. Ann C. Moorman 
Ms. Gretchen Nelson 
Mr. Maxwell V. Pritt 
Hon. Thomas J. Umberg 

ADVISORY MEMBERS 
Hon. Judith K. Dulcich 
Ms. Rebecca J. Fleming 
Mr. Shawn C. Landry 
Hon. Kimberly Merrifield 
Hon. Glenn Mondo 
Hon. David Rosenberg 
Mr. David H. Yamasaki 

MS. MILLICENT TIDWELL 
Acting Administrative Director 
Judicial Council 

February 8, 2023 

Ms. Cara L. Jenkins 
Legislative Counsel  
1021 O Street, Suite 3210  
Sacramento, California 95814  

Ms. Erika Contreras  
Secretary of the Senate  
State Capitol, Room 307  
Sacramento, California 95814  

Ms. Sue Parker  
Chief Clerk of the Assembly  
State Capitol, Room 319  
Sacramento, California 95814  

Re: Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations, as 
required under Assembly Bill 143 (Stats. 2021, ch. 79) 

Dear Ms. Jenkins, Ms. Contreras, and Ms. Parker: 

Pursuant to Government Code section 68645.5, the Judicial Council is 
submitting Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay 
Determinations (February 2023). 

If you have any questions related to this report, please contact Francine 
Byrne at 415-865-8069 or by email at Francine.Byrne@jud.ca.gov. 

Sincerely, 

Millicent Tidwell 
Acting Administrative Director 
Judicial Council 

=== PAGINA 2 ===
Ms. Cara L. Jenkins 
Ms. Erika Contreras 
Ms. Sue Parker 
January 10, 2023 
Page 2 
MT/FB/CC/sc 
Enclosures  
cc: 
Eric Dang, Counsel, Office of Senate President pro Tempore Toni G. Atkins  
Alf Brandt, General Counsel, Office of Assembly Speaker Anthony Rendon  
Shaun Naidu, Policy Consultant, Office of Assembly Speaker Anthony Rendon  
Anita Lee, Principal Fiscal and Policy Analyst, Legislative Analyst’s Office  
Gabriel Petek, Legislative Analyst, Legislative Analyst’s Office  
Jessie Romine, Budget Analyst, Department of Finance  
Margie Estrada, Chief Counsel, Senate Judiciary Committee  
Mary Kennedy, Chief Counsel, Senate Public Safety Committee  
Nora Brackbill, Consultant, Senate Budget and Fiscal Review Committee  
Matthew Fleming, Consultant, Senate Appropriations Committee  
Hans Hemann, Principal Consultant, Joint Legislative Budget Committee  
Eric Csizmar, Consultant, Senate Republican Policy Office  
Matt Osterli, Consultant, Senate Republican Fiscal Office  
Morgan Branch, Consultant, Senate Republican Policy Office  
Alison Merrilees, Chief Counsel, Assembly Judiciary Committee  
Sandy Uribe, Chief Counsel, Assembly Public Safety Committee  
Jennifer Kim, Consultant, Assembly Budget Committee  
Jay Dickenson, Chief Consultant, Assembly Appropriations Committee  
Kimberly Horiuchi, Principal Consultant, Assembly Appropriations Committee  
Lyndsay Mitchell, Consultant, Assembly Republican Office of Policy & Budget  
Gary Olson, Consultant, Assembly Republican Office of Policy & Budget  
Daryl Thomas, Consultant, Assembly Republican Office of Policy & Budget  
Amy Leach, Minute Clerk, Office of Assembly Chief Clerk  
Cory T. Jasperson, Director, Governmental Affairs, Judicial Council  
Zlatko Theodorovic, Director, Budget Services, Judicial Council  
Fran Mueller, Deputy Director, Budget Services, Judicial Council  

Jenniffer Herman, Administrative Coordinator, Governmental Affairs, Judicial Council  

=== PAGINA 3 ===

455 Golden Gate Avenue 
San Francisco, CA 94102-3688 
Tel. 415-865-4200 
Fax 415-865-4205 
www.courts.ca.gov 

HON. PATRICIA GUERRERO 
Chief Justice of California 
Chair of the Judicial Council 

HON. MARSHA G. SLOUGH 
Chair, Executive and Planning Committee 

HON. DAVID M. RUBIN 
Chair, Judicial Branch Budget Committee 
Chair, Litigation Management Committee 

HON. MARLA O. ANDERSON 
Chair, Legislation Committee 

HON. CARIN T. FUJISAKI 
Chair, Rules Committee 

HON. KYLE S. BRODIE 
Chair, Technology Committee 

Hon. Maria Lucy Armendariz 
Hon. C. Todd Bottke 
Hon. Kevin C. Brazile 
Hon. Jonathan B. Conklin  
Hon. Carol A. Corrigan 
Hon. Samuel K. Feng 
Mr. David D. Fu 
Hon. Brad R. Hill 
Ms. Rachel W. Hill 
Hon. Harold W. Hopp 
Hon. Ann C. Moorman 
Ms. Gretchen Nelson 
Mr. Maxwell V. Pritt 
Hon. Thomas J. Umberg 

A DVIS ORY ME MB ERS 
Hon. Judith K. Dulcich 
Ms. Rebecca J. Fleming 
Mr. Shawn C. Landry 
Hon. Kimberly Merrifield 
Hon. Glenn Mondo 
Hon. David Rosenberg 
Mr. David H. Yamasaki 

MS. MILLICENT TIDWELL 
Acting Administrative Director 
Judicial Council 

Report title: Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay 
Determinations 

Statutory citation: Stats. 2021, ch. 79 

Code section: Government Code section 68645.5 

Date of report: February 2023 

The Judicial Council has submitted a report to the Legislature in 
accordance with Government Code section 68645.5. 

The following summary of the report is provided under the requirements 
of Government Code section 9795. 

With the passage of Assembly Bill 143 (Stats. 2021, ch. 79), the 
Judicial Council was mandated to administer a statewide system that 
allows for the online adjudication of infraction violations by June 30, 
2024. The statute requires an annual report every February between 
2022 and 2025. Unique for the report due February 2023, the statute 
required information on the initial pilot program and lessons learned.  

This report is the second of the four reports required. This report: 
• Evaluates all ability-to-pay determinations for infraction violations 
from courts that have adopted MyCitations, the online ability-to-

pay tool. 
• Evaluates the pilot period, including implementation 
challenges, the overall effectiveness of the program in the 
seven pilot courts, and how the pilots informed the 
implementation in expansion courts. 
• Documents statewide expansion activities. 
• Describes the next steps of onboarding additional courts. 

The full report can be accessed at www.courts.ca.gov/7466.htm.  

A printed copy of the report may be obtained by calling 415-865-8994. 

=== PAGINA 4 ===

Online Infraction 
Adjudication and 
Ability-to-Pay 
Determinations 

REPORT TO THE LEGISLATURE 

February 2023 

=== PAGINA 5 ===

JUDICIAL COUNCIL OF CALIFORNIA 

Hon. Patricia Guerrero 
Chief Justice of California and 
Chair of the Judicial Council 

Millicent Tidwell 
Acting Administrative Director 
Judicial Council 

OPERATIONS AND PROGRAMS DIVISION 
Robert Oyung 
Chief Operating Officer 

CRIMINAL JUSTICE SERVICES 
Francine Byrne 
Director 

Martha Wright 
Manager 

Colin Christensen, Ph.D. 
Supervising Analyst 
Primary Author of Report 

Sherry Celio 
Senior Analyst 

Callum Urquhart 
Analyst 
Data Visuals 

=== PAGINA 6 ===
Contents 

Executive Summary ..................................................................................................................... 1 
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 2 
Background ................................................................................................................................... 2 
Part I – Pilot Program Performance Evaluation ...................................................................... 3 
Online ability-to-pay requests and access to court services ................................................................. 3 
Fine and fee reductions and case resolutions ....................................................................................... 4 
Key success indicators .......................................................................................................................... 5 
Payment plan case outcomes ................................................................................................................ 7 
Ability-to-pay reductions and amounts collected .................................................................................. 9 
MyCitations User Survey Data ............................................................................................. 10 
Implementation Challenges .................................................................................................. 10 
Lessons Learned from the Pilot Program ........................................................................... 11 
Part II – MyCitations To Date ................................................................................................... 13 
MyCitations System Usage Summary ................................................................................ 13 
Litigant demographics ........................................................................................................................ 14 
Requests and reductions...................................................................................................................... 16 
System Enhancements ......................................................................................................... 18 
Future MyCitations features ............................................................................................................... 19 
Part III - Next Steps .................................................................................................................... 19 
Appendix A: Methodology ......................................................................................................... 20 
Data, methods, and limitations ........................................................................................................... 20 
Payment plan analysis ........................................................................................................................ 21 
Appendix B: Zip Codes .............................................................................................................. 23 
Top Five Most Common MyCitations User Zip Codes by County Cumulative Data from April 2019–

September 1, 2022 ............................................................................................................................... 23 
Appendix C: How the Tool Works ............................................................................................ 26 

=== PAGINA 7 ===

1 

Executive Summary 
This legislative report describes actions taken in furtherance of the statewide expansion of  
online ability-to-pay determinations for infraction violations as authorized by Assembly Bill 143 
(Stats. 2021 ch. 79). The report also provides data from California superior courts that have 
adopted the MyCitations tool to adjudicate eligible infractions as required by Government Code 
section 68645.5 (added by Stats. 2021, ch. 79, § 8). MyCitations is an online tool developed and 
maintained by the Judicial Council that allows people with infraction violations to request a 
reduction in their criminal fines and fees. 

As of January 1, 2023, sixteen courts implemented MyCitations, offering litigants the option to 
submit ability-to-pay requests online. Since the program’s launch in April 2019, over 66,000 
ability-to-pay requests were submitted through the MyCitations tool by over 45,000 litigants in 
those courts. Nearly 46 percent of litigants reported that they receive public benefits and just 
over 88 percent reported incomes at or below the poverty line. 

These litigants account for over $41.5 million in outstanding criminal fines and fees, with an 
average of $621 owed on each request. Upon judicial review, the total fines and fees ordered 
through the tool was reduced to $21.4 million. Cases that were granted a reduction account 
for over $20 million in reduced fines and fees. 

This report also provides additional information on the program’s pilot period, which ran 
from April 2019 through July 2021 and included seven courts. That information includes 
an evaluation of the pilot program’s overall effectiveness, implementation challenges, and 
lessons for statewide expansion efforts. 

Case-level analysis of debts collected from requests adjudicated during the program’s pilot 
period demonstrates that a litigant is more likely to pay a reduced amount. Specifically, 
that analysis shows that as the amount ordered decreases, the success rate for full repayment 
of the financial obligation increases. Aggregate analysis of these same cases demonstrates 
that cases granted a reduction through the tool have a 61 percent success rate, which is defined as 
the full repayment of the reduced amount within the timeline set by the court. By contrast, 
cases denied relief through the tool exhibit a 29 percent success rate. 

=== PAGINA 8 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
2 

Introduction 
This report fulfills the legislative mandate in Government Code section 68645 (added by 
Stats. 2021, ch. 79, § 8), which authorized the statewide expansion of an online tool for 
adjudicating infraction violations and ability-to-pay determinations, otherwise known as 
MyCitations. The Judicial Council is responsible for the development and implementation of the 
tool, and it is tasked with making the tool available statewide on or before June 30, 2024. This 
report presents information on the actions taken by the Judicial Council to advance the statewide 
expansion as well as data analytics on how the tool is being utilized in courts that currently offer 
the program. As directed by the Legislature, this report also supplies additional information on 
the program’s pilot period, including an empirical evaluation of the pilot’s overall effectiveness, 
implementation challenges, and lessons for statewide expansion efforts.  

Accordingly, this report is divided into two parts. Part I reports on the pilot period’s overall 
effectiveness and lessons learned for the program’s statewide expansion. Part II reports on 
legislatively mandated data elements that measure system utilization, litigant demographics, and 
financial savings to users from April 2019 through January 1, 2023. 
Background  
Before the development of MyCitations, litigants had two main options for adjudicating 
infractions: an individual could pay in full or appear in court. Although many courts maintain 
various local procedures that allow litigants to request a reduction in fines and fees for infraction 
violations, including utilizing the plain language form Can’t Afford to Pay Fine: Traffic and 
Other Infractions (form TR-320) or petitions to vacate a civil assessment, those requests usually 
must be filed in person or heard before a judge. Appearing in court poses a barrier to many as it 
may require taking time off work, securing childcare, and/or finding transportation. 
Consequently, access to relief for infraction debt was constrained. 

According to the Judicial Council’s 2022 Court Statistics Report on statewide caseload trends, 
during fiscal year 2020–21 over 2.6 million infraction cases, both traffic and nontraffic, were 
filed in California superior courts. Nearly six out of every ten court filings in California—59 
percent—is an infraction filing, and over 95 percent of all infractions implicate the Vehicle 
Code. Many Californians are unable to pay the fines and fees imposed for infraction violations. 

The Judicial Council began to study the impact of high fines and fees on low-income court users 
and options to minimize these impacts in 2016 with funding from the U.S. Department of 
Justice’s Price of Justice Initiative. The Judicial Council used that funding to partner with five 
superior courts to design a process for submitting and adjudicating ability-to-pay determinations 
online. That effort included identifying online workflows, selecting a software vendor, 
developing a prototype of the online tool, and testing interfaces with various court case 
management systems. The resulting prototype provided users with the ability to search for their 
citation and make requests online for reductions in traffic fines and fees based on their ability to 
pay. 

=== PAGINA 9 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
3 

Building on these early achievements, the Budget Act of 2018 (Senate Bill 847; Stats. 2018, ch. 
29) allocated funding to the Judicial Council to officially designate a pilot program and expand 
the work to two additional superior courts. In 2021, Assembly Bill 143 (Stats. 2021, ch. 79) 
established that all California superior courts must offer the online tool for adjudicating ability-

to-pay requests related to infraction violations by June 30, 2024 and instructed the Judicial 
Council to implement the tool on a phased schedule. 
Part I – Pilot Program Performance Evaluation 
This report fulfills the requirements in Government Code section 68645.6 by providing further 
information on the first seven courts, all of which operated as part of a pilot program from April 
2019 through June 2021. That information includes an assessment of the overall program 
effectiveness in each court, implementation challenges, and an overview of the ways in which 
the pilots inform continued efforts toward the program’s statewide expansion. In accordance 
with the legislative mandate, this report assesses program effectiveness by way of three key 
performance indicators. These indicators include the extent to which the program 

1. increased access to court services; 
2. reduced fines and fees to an amount that litigants are able to fully pay; and 
3. lowered barriers to court services and raised user satisfaction. 

Online ability-to-pay requests and access to court services 
Before MyCitations, relief for infraction debt often required litigants to file a request in person or 
appear before a judge. A primary goal that motivated creating a new option for submitting 
ability-to-pay requests was to expand access to the courts. By analyzing the number of requests 
made in court or via paper form against the number of online requests made during the same 
period, it is clear that that goal has been achieved. Figure 1 compares the number of paper and/or 
in-person ability-to-pay requests received in the pilot courts to the number of online requests 
received through MyCitations from 2019 to 2022.

1  

1

 Not all pilot courts kept track of paper ability-to-pay requests before their MyCitations tool went live. 
MyCitations data is date-limited to the date on which each corresponding pilot court submitted data on 
paper filings. 

=== PAGINA 10 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
4 

Fine and fee reductions and case resolutions 
In the February 2022 legislative report, the Judicial Council analyzed collections data from six of 
the seven pilot courts to measure the court-ordered debt recovered after a reduction is granted 
through MyCitations. That preliminary analysis, which measured aggregate collections for cases 
adjudicated during the pilot period, demonstrated that 42 percent of court ordered debt was 
recovered from cases that received relief through an online ability-to-pay request. By contrast, 
only 22 percent of debt was recovered from cases denied such relief. This report relies on the 
same collections data but analyzes case-level rather than aggregate outcomes to measure the 
extent to which the fines and fees ordered through MyCitations are reduced to a level that 
litigants are able to fully pay.  

The Judicial Council received collections data for 21,724 cases that were adjudicated through the 
MyCitations tool during the pilot period. Within this sample, 19,347 petitions were granted some 
form of relief and 2,479 petitions were denied. After date-limiting the data to ensure that each 
case analyzed had enough time to repay their financial obligation, the sample was reduced to 
12,324 cases. Consequently, the proceeding analysis includes only cases that were ordered to 
tender complete payment of the amount ordered through the MyCitations tool before the date that 
each pilot court reported the balance of the case to the Judicial Council. (For details on data and 
methodology, see Appendix 1.) 

=== PAGINA 11 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
5 

Successful reductions are defined as cases that are fully repaid by the due date set by the court. 
Accordingly, throughout the analysis, success rate expresses the proportion of cases ordered 
through MyCitations that are fully repaid within the timeline set out in the terms of their court 
order. Table 1 summarizes the proportion of cases that fully repaid their legal financial 
obligations within the terms of their court order after receiving a reduction. The table divides 
cases into two categories: “Reduction Only” represents those cases that received only a 
reduction, whereas “Payment Plan” represents those cases that received both a reduction and the 
option to pay in monthly installments. 

In contrast to the overall success rate of MyCitations cases that were approved for a reduction, 
ability-to-pay requests that were denied exhibit a much lower overall success rate. Requests are 
denied for a variety of reasons, including for correctable infractions, ineligible cases (e.g., 
misdemeanors), income that exceeds the locally established indigency rate for eligibility, or 
insufficient information. Future reporting will include further analysis on denial reasons. Table 2 
below summarizes the proportion of cases denied relief through MyCitations that fully repaid 
their legal financial obligations. 

Key success indicators 
To better understand the characteristics of successful MyCitations requests, defined as those 
cases that repaid the total amount ordered by the due date set by the court, cases that were 
approved for a reduction and within the terms of their court order were partitioned into $100 
order brackets, beginning with orders less than $100, and analyzed according to the same metric 
for success rates. Grouping and partitioning cases by the amount ordered demonstrates that the 
proportion of cases that successfully repay their infraction debt increases as the amount ordered 
decreases. Figure 2 below illustrates both the success rate for each bracket and the smoothed 
trend across brackets.

2  

2

 For all figures contained within this report, smoothed trends are calculated using the LOESS method.   

=== PAGINA 12 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
6 

In addition to analyzing success rates by amount ordered, MyCitations requests were also 
grouped into income ranges that distribute cases across 10 percent segments. Each bracket 
represents the amount ordered as a proportion of the litigant’s reported monthly income. Figure 3 
represents the proportion of non-payment plan cases in each income bracket that are fully repaid 
within the terms of their court order. Figure 3 illustrates both the success rate of each bracket and 
the smoothed trend across all brackets. 

As that figure shows, as the amount ordered consumes more of a litigant’s monthly income, 
success rates decline. For cases that do not include a payment plan, successful repayment drops 
by nearly one fifth once the amount ordered is greater than 20 percent of a litigant’s reported 
monthly income. 

=== PAGINA 13 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
7 

Payment plan case outcomes 
As reported above, approximately 58 percent of payment plan cases that were expected to have 
culminated within the reporting period successfully repaid their legal financial obligations. In 
addition to assessing the overall success rate for payment plan cases, the Judicial Council sought 
also to analyze the specific success rate for $25 monthly payment plans. These payment plans 
were selected both because $25 per month is contemplated in the program’s authorizing statute 
and because it is the monthly payment ordered with the greatest frequency. 

In total, 5,950 cases were ordered to pay up to $500 through MyCitations and given the option to 
repay that debt in $25 installments during the pilot period. At the time of reporting, 2,797 were 
fully repaid and 3,153 were not. For cases with outstanding balances, only 2.2 percent (70 cases) 
are estimated to have been on track to repay their legal financial obligations within the terms of 
their payment plans, raising the estimated total cases fully repaid or on track to be fully repaid to 
2,867. Consequently, the estimated total success rate for $25 payment plans is 48.2 percent.  

Fifty-dollar payment plans, which are the second most frequent installment plan ordered through 
MyCitations, are less successful than $25 payment plans. Of 2,457 such plans ordered during the 
pilot period, 652 cases were fully repaid at the time of reporting and 1,805 were not. For cases 

=== PAGINA 14 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
8 

with an outstanding balance, less than 1 percent were on track to be repaid within the expected 
terms of their installment plan (15 cases). In contrast to the estimated 48 percent success rate for 
$25 payment plans, the estimated success rate for $50 payment plans is approximately 27 
percent. 

While payment plans offer litigants short-term relief by easing the pressure that fine and fee 
obligations place on their monthly incomes, the total amount a litigant is ordered to pay is what 
is most strongly associated with successful case outcomes. Figure 4 below illustrates this trend 
by partitioning the sample of $25 payment plan cases into respective $25 order brackets and 
measuring the proportion of cases in each bracket that fully repaid their debt within the terms of 
their installment plan. 

=== PAGINA 15 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
9 

Ability-to-pay reductions and amounts collected 
As noted above, reducing fines and fees to $300 or less for low-income litigants exhibits 
successful repayment rates of 65 percent or greater. Further analysis demonstrates that reducing 
fines and fees below that threshold supports successful collection of funds that are intended to 
benefit legislatively designated sources. While the absolute value (i.e., total dollars ordered) of 
potential collections from cases that owe more money is higher by comparison, these case 
outcomes demonstrate that the realized value (i.e., total dollars collected) is greater when 
litigants are ordered to pay less. Figure 5 illustrates this trend by partitioning cases into $100 
order brackets and comparing the total amount ordered to the amount collected for cases in each 
order bracket. 

Not only do courts collect more from cases that are ordered to pay less than $300, but, as the 
amount ordered increases, the average amount collected from cases plateaus at approximately 
$220. This trend tracks closely to the trend illustrated in Figure 4, in which success rates dropped 
below 50 percent once the amount ordered breached $200. This data suggests that reducing fines 
and fees below $300 benefits both litigants and the courts by lowering financial obligations to an 
amount that litigants are able to pay and by increasing the amounts that courts collect, 
respectively.  

=== PAGINA 16 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
10 

MyCitations User Survey Data 
Litigants using MyCitations are invited to respond to a series of optional user-feedback survey 
questions after they have submitted their request. These questions attempt to gauge whether 
litigants find the tool easy to use, whether they would prefer to handle future court matters 
online, and whether they think the tool is helpful. Responses to each of these survey questions 
are illustrated in figures 6, 7, and 8, respectively. 

Implementation Challenges 
MyCitations is the first online tool that the Judicial Council has developed and maintained for 
statewide use. Its implementation requires a thoughtful balance between providing courts the 
flexibility to incorporate the tool into their unique local processes and workflows while also 
ensuring that litigants are treated to the same streamlined experience for submitting ability-to-

pay requests from county to county. In the pursuit of striking this balance during the pilot 

=== PAGINA 17 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
11 

program, the Judicial Council encountered several series of hurdles. These hurdles fall broadly 
into two main categories: technical challenges and developmental challenges. 

Technical challenges. The Judicial Council selected each pilot court because of the court’s 
interest in the project, the court’s willingness to work with the Judicial Council, and the variety 
of case management systems and unique business processes each court offered. In the initial pilot 
phase, the first five pilot courts (in San Francisco, Santa Clara, Shasta, Tulare, and Ventura 
Counties) each had a different case management system (CMS), which required five unique 
connections to the tool. Integrating the citation information from each courts’ CMS to the 
MyCitations tool was successful. Challenges emerged, however, when MyCitations attempted to 
return outcomes from the tool to the courts’ CMSs. The Judicial Council found that courts with 
Tyler Odyssey CMSs did not have the necessary application programming interfaces (APIs) to 
allow the two-way interface to work. To remedy this problem, the Judicial Council worked 
closely with Tyler Technologies to get the required APIs in place. The Judicial Council 
continues to work with the CMS vendors to find better solutions that will allow courts to connect 
to MyCitations using the two-way interface.  

Developmental challenges. As the volume of requests submitted through MyCitations increased 
throughout the pilot, there were unforeseen challenges identified in the data collected by the 
system. For instance, duplicate requests were a problem in the pilot stage. Because litigants can 
make a new request anytime their financial circumstances change, Judicial Council staff worked 
closely with the courts to make improvements to the tool that would limit duplicate requests but 
still allow the litigant to use the system multiple times when needed. Hoping to eliminate 
duplicate requests, Judicial Council staff made changes to the user interface to send an email 
confirmation to the litigant that their request was received and was being processed. The litigant 
can now confirm all information they provide to the court before submitting and is provided a 
confirmation email that the court has received the request. In addition, the tool will prevent a 
litigant from making another request on the same citation for 24 hours. 

About a year into the pilot program, several judicial officers reported challenges reviewing cases 
in which the individual reported having no sources of income but several regular monthly 
expenses. If the litigant were in court, the judicial officer would likely ask for additional 
clarification about job loss, housing status, and related issues to better understand their financial 
situation. Accordingly, an enhancement was implemented to alert the MyCitations user that they 
were reporting no income and to prompt them to provide additional information. In a subsequent 
enhancement, an additional screen was added showing the litigant a summary of each financial 
detail they reported so they can review for accuracy and easily navigate back to edit if necessary. 
Lessons Learned from the Pilot Program 
The pilot program initially started with a 2016 grant from the U.S. Department of Justice, and 
then further supported by a fiscal year 2018—19 state budget allocation that was designed to 
inform whether MyCitations could be taken to scale statewide. The approximately two-year pilot 
developed a prototype, launched it in seven courts, and put a feedback loop in place to 
recommend and implement software fixes and enhancements. Regular monthly sessions with 
pilot court staff, judicial officers and Judicial Council staff provided the opportunity to discuss 
issues that arose, brainstorm resolutions, and then schedule the software enhancement. 

=== PAGINA 18 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
12 

Continuing product enhancements The Judicial Council and MyCitations courts continue to 
meet monthly to provide regular feedback and recommend specific improvements to the tool. 
Fixes and enhancements are discussed, logged, presented, and then scheduled for the appropriate 
software release when approved. As courts and data analysts identify issues, the council will 
continue to develop solutions. Key product enhancements completed by Judicial Council in 2022 
include a new court order format and integration with the California Department of Social 
Services’ Calfresh Confirm application to confirm whether a litigant receives CalFresh benefits. 

Revised court orders. The Judicial Council began working with an outside consultant in 2019 to 
find ways to improve the MyCitations system. To understand the barriers low-income 
Californians face in resolving their traffic citations, ideas42, a behavioral research firm, 
interviewed traffic court staff and litigants who used MyCitations. After system data showed that 
people were generally able to finish an ability-to-pay application through MyCitations in one 
sitting and interviewees indicated that the system was easy to use, ideas42 focused on the 
defendant’s ability to resolve the citation after receiving an adjusted court order. Working in 
conjunction with ideas42, Judicial Council staff redesigned the adjusted court order that informs 
litigants of their MyCitations decision and the reduced amount they now owe. The updated order 
highlights the original and new amounts owed, provides clear, plain-language instructions on 
what to do next, offers direct links to make payments, and provides optional court contact 
information for any questions the order does not address. 

Empirical data on litigants both on and off public benefits. Because a primary factor in the 
tool’s calculator function is whether a litigant reports that they receive public benefits (see 
flowchart in Appendix 3), the Judicial Council found that some courts were unsure how to 
configure the reduction rates applied to each group in a way that ensured parity between them. In 
response to this concern, the Judicial Council analyzed nearly 8,000 cases to determine the 
material differences between litigants on public benefits and litigants not on public benefits. That 
study highlights three key indicators of the relationship between these groups: 

1. The average monthly income of litigants on benefits is 31 percent less than litigants not 
on benefits ($1,026 per month). 

2. The average poverty rate for litigants on benefits is 53 percent. 

3. When monthly income for litigants on benefits is adjusted to reflect the “cash” value of 
the benefits they receive, their average monthly income is still less than that of litigants 
not on benefits. 

In sum, that research demonstrates that litigants in receipt of public benefits experience the 
greatest financial hardships. Consequently, such litigants have the least ability to pay their 
infraction debt.  In light of these empirical insights, the Judicial Council provides the following 
configuration guidance to new courts that are onboarded as part of the statewide expansion: the 
reduction rate for litigants on benefits should be equal to the maximum offered on the sliding-

scale for litigants not on benefits. (For more information on how the tool calculates reduction 
recommendations, see Appendix 3.) 

=== PAGINA 19 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
13 

Empirical data on successful case outcomes and optimal reduction rates. For courts that 
share case-level collections data on MyCitations cases, the Judicial Council can assess case 
outcomes and the effectiveness of the court’s tool configuration to offer guidance on how to 
improve program performance within a specific jurisdiction. This ability is a direct result of the 
lessons learned from analyzing cases adjudicated during the pilot period. As the statewide 
expansion progresses, the Judicial Council looks forward to working with courts to optimize 
their tool configurations based on factors such as the poverty rate and cost of living specific to 
each county, the median infraction debt owed by MyCitations users in each county, and the 
corresponding repayment rates on such debt after an ability-to-pay determination. 
Part II – MyCitations To Date 
The sections contained within this part satisfy Government Code section 68645.5 and report 
legislatively mandated data on system utilization, litigant demographics, and fines and fees 
ordered through the tool. The data reported herein spans the time period from April 2019 through 
January 1, 2023. 
MyCitations System Usage Summary 
The data reported in this section fulfills the requirements in Government Code section 68645.5, 
which includes data on infraction filings, demographic information on litigants using the online 
system, the number of ability-to-pay requests submitted through the tool, and fines and fees 
reduced. The figures reported herein represent data from 16 counties that were live with the tool 
as of January 1, 2023. Table 3 indexes each of these counties against the Judicial Council’s 
expansion schedule and summarizes the total number of MyCitations requests in each court.

3 

3

 Pilot courts went live with MyCitations between April 2019 and April 2021; Cohort 2 between February 
2022 and June 2022; Cohort 3 between July 2022 and October 2022; and Cohort 4 between October 2022 
and February 2023.  

=== PAGINA 20 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
14 

Litigant demographics 
The 66,821 requests submitted through the MyCitations tool include 45,745 unique litigants. 
Many litigants with infraction debt have multiple citations, and litigants may submit subsequent 
requests for each citation in the event that their financial circumstances change. At the time of 
their requests, 46 percent of those litigants reported receiving some type of public benefit and 88 
percent reported incomes at or below 250 percent of the federal poverty level. 

Racial and ethnic demographics of MyCitations users. Two mechanisms are available for 
gathering racial demographic information on MyCitations users. One is the information recorded 
on the citation by the issuing officer. The other is through self-reported responses to an optional 
survey question that appears after a user submits their request. That survey invites users to select 
from among six racial and/or ethnic categories with which they most closely identify, or to 
complete a free-form text entry if these categories do not sufficiently capture their racial and/or 
ethnic identity. Users are not limited to one racial or ethnic identity and may select multiple 
categories. 

=== PAGINA 21 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
15 

Although racial demographic information supplied from the citation has been recorded by the 
MyCitations tool since its inception, not all citations include complete data, and many are 
analytically ambiguous by indicating “Other” or “Unknown.” In addition, the MyCitations 
system interface is not configured to gather racial/ethnic information in several counties due to 
technological limitations in their case management systems. The Judicial Council added the 
optional survey question with respect to self-reported racial/ethnic identity in December 2021 as 
an attempt to gather a more complete picture of the racial demographics of MyCitations users. 
The survey data does not substitute data recorded on the citation, nor does it supply a 
commentary on the accuracy of one source over the other. 

Based on data recorded on the citation, racial demographics are reported for 24,119 of the 45,745 
litigants using the system. Alternatively, based on survey responses data from MyCitations users, 
racial demographics were self-reported by 16,046 litigants. Distributions for each are illustrated 
in figure 9 and figure 10, respectively. 

=== PAGINA 22 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
16 

Residential zip code demographics. Additional demographic information about system users 
includes a citation holder’s residential zip code. The top five most frequent residential zip codes 
for MyCitations users in each superior court are found in Appendix 2. These zip codes generally 
show higher poverty rates than the corresponding county-wide poverty rate. To determine this, 
the Judicial Council relied on data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community Survey, 
which reports both on the county-wide poverty rate at 200 percent of the federal poverty level as 
well as on the poverty rate by zip code based on the same level. For the top five most frequent 
zip codes across all participating MyCitations counties, the average poverty rate is 35 percent. By 
contrast, the average county-wide poverty rate for these same counties is 31 percent. Moreover, 
63 percent of participating counties (10 of 16) have an average poverty rate across their top five 
residential zip codes for MyCitations users that is higher than their corresponding county-wide 
poverty rate. 
Requests and reductions 
As of January 1, 2023, a total of 66,821 requests had been submitted to the MyCitations system 
by 45,745 litigants across 16 superior courts. Of those requests, the total amount of fines and fees 
initially owed by litigants was over $41.5 million, averaging $621.45 per request. Upon judicial 
review, the total amount of fines and fees ordered through the tool was approximately $21.4 
million which accounts for over $20 million in reduced fines and fees. However, two factors 
impact the average amount ordered. The first is the disposition of the case. The average order 
amount for cases approved for a reduction is correspondingly lower than the amount for cases for 
which reductions are denied. The second is the amount of civil assessment fees imposed on each 
case. Assembly Bill 199 (Stats 2022, ch. 57) required courts to discharge debt from previously 
imposed civil assessments and amended Penal Code section 1214.1 to lower the maximum civil 
assessment amount from $300 to $100 as of July 1, 2022. The average debt owed by MyCitations 
users and the average amount ordered through the tool is thus impacted by these legislative 
changes such that the average amount owed per request before and after AB 199 took effect is 
$671 and $493, respectively. 

Tables 4 and 5 below separate MyCitations cases pre- and post-AB 199 to illustrate the impact of 
these legislative changes to civil assessments on the average amount owed and ordered through 
MyCitations. To illustrate how the disposition of the case impacts both of these amounts, the 
tables divide cases into three categories: approved with reduction, approved without reduction, 
and rejected. Whereas cases approved with reduction represent those requests for which the total 
fines and fees were reduced, cases approved without reduction represent those cases for which 
either a payment plan, more time to pay, or community service were granted without reducing 
the case’s total financial obligation. Rejected cases represent those cases for which no relief is 
granted. 

=== PAGINA 23 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
17 

Courts can configure the administrative settings in the MyCitations tool to recommend 
reductions of 50 percent or greater. These configurations are jurisdictionally specific and set at 
each court’s discretion. The average reduction recommended by the tool across all participating 
courts is 61 percent and the average reduction ordered is 57 percent. While the MyCitations 
calculator offers an initial recommendation for all requests based on the administrative settings 
selected by each court, judicial officers retain the discretion to accept or adjust the 
recommendation based on the facts of the case. Overall, 82 percent of the 66,821 requests were 
approved by the courts for a reduction and judicial officers accepted the tool recommendation, 
within a $10 difference, 97 percent of the time. 

When a litigant is eligible for a reduction and requests a payment plan, the MyCitations tool 
recommends a $25 monthly payment. Of 37,585 approved requests in which the litigant asked 
for a payment plan, 28,784 payment plans were ordered. However, payment plans are not always 
approved using the payment plan function of the MyCitations tool. In a number of cases, 
instructions for establishing a payment plan appear on the order as a comment provided by the 
court. It is not clear as of this writing how many cases establish a payment plan after and apart 
from their MyCitations request. 

In addition to reductions and payment plans, 15,814 of cases included a request for community 
service. In total, 4,384 cases were approved for community service, with an average community 
service requirement of 12 hours per case. 

=== PAGINA 24 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
18 

In total, 84 percent of MyCitations requests were approved for at least one of the four types of 
relief offered through the tool: reduction, payment plan, community service, or more time to pay. 
Figure 12 below summarizes the order frequencies for the top five most common judgments 
ordered for all cases adjudicated through the MyCitations tool as of January 1, 2023. 

System Enhancements 
Calfresh Confirm. The tool was enhanced in November 2022 to offer litigants an alternative to 
uploading proof of benefits. Litigants can now authorize MyCitations to verify receipt of 
CalFresh benefits directly through the California Department of Social Services’ CalFresh 
Confirm application without leaving the MyCitations tool. When confirmed, the tool will show 
the court that proof of benefits has been provided through CalFresh verification. Unverified 
results are not shared with the court. The inability to verify benefits does not mean a litigant is 
not on benefits, just that the system could not confirm the benefits. 

=== PAGINA 25 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
19 

Future MyCitations features 
The Judicial Council is expanding the traffic court functions available under the MyCitations 
platform to provide litigants with more options to do business with the courts remotely. The 
Online Trial By Declaration (OTBD) module allows the litigant to contest eligible traffic 
citations by submitting a written statement and uploading evidence online through MyCitations. 
Development on the OTBD module was completed in 2021, and in 2022 the Judicial Council 
migrated the code to a single code base with the MyCitations, Ability to Pay module. The 
Judicial Council is currently in the planning phase to mirror recent enhancements from the 
Ability to Pay module to the OTBD module. The OTBD module did not deploy as expected in 
2022, but implementation activities will continue with the Fresno, Santa Clara, and San 
Francisco courts as resources and scheduling allow in 2023. 

MyCitations is currently available in English and Spanish, and in 2023 will be available in 
three additional languages: Traditional Chinese, Simplified Chinese, and Vietnamese. 

Part III - Next Steps 
Statewide expansion. In the earliest planning stages, the Judicial Council anticipated that 27 
courts would be live with MyCitations by the end of January 2023. As of January 1, 2023, 16 
courts were live with the tool. Five additional courts have onboarded since then and 21 courts are 
live at this time. The Judicial Council’s statewide expansion efforts faced some challenges. Chief 
among these challenges is the deployment of MyCitations in each court’s case management 
system. Several courts scheduled to go live with the tool in calendar year 2022 utilize a version 
of a case management system with which MyCitations has not previously been coupled. 
Accordingly, the timeline for onboarding these courts was extended so that the Judicial Council 
could partner with the appropriate CMS vendors to develop the missing features and to build the 
technical solutions necessary to interface with these courts. The Judicial Council has scheduled 
remaining courts to go live in phases with the goal of achieving statewide implementation by 
June 30, 2024. 

=== PAGINA 26 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
20 

Appendix A: Methodology 
This appendix documents the methodology used for the pilot program performance evaluation. 
Data, methods, and limitations 
As an effort to better understand the programmatic efficacy of reductions ordered through the 
MyCitations tool, the Judicial Council analyzed MyCitations data alongside court collections 
records from each pilot court. Collections records are not included in the data collected by the 
MyCitations program and were provided by the participating courts for all requests adjudicated 
during the pilot period. In combination, these records allow the Judicial Council to compare the 
amount ordered through the MyCitations tool to the amount collected after an ability-to-pay 
determination is completed. 

To produce an accurate assessment of amounts collected, records provided by the pilot courts 
and collections partners were matched with MyCitations data by case number. Collections data 
reflects the balance and amount paid at the time repayment reports were received from each 
court. Cases with multiple requests were consolidated to reflect the original amount due and the 
most recent reduction ordered by a court. Further, cases approved for community service were 
excluded from this analysis as “payments” since these cases are tracked in hours, not dollars. 
Upon consolidation and cleaning, the Judicial Council received collections data for 21,724 cases 
adjudicated through the MyCitations tool during the pilot period. Within this sample, 19,347 
petitions were granted some form of relief and 2,479 petitions were denied. 

To ensure that success rates account for the amount of time litigants receive to fulfill their legal 
financial obligations upon receiving a judgment on their MyCitations request, the data used in 
this report is date-limited. Thus, the sample analyzed includes only those cases for which the 
pay-by date that appears on the court order is before the date on which the corresponding county 
submitted collections data. In other words, all cases included in the sample were ordered to 
tender complete payment of the amount ordered through MyCitations before the date that each 
county reported the balance of the case to the Judicial Council. By date-limiting the collections 
data, the analysis in this report relies on the underlying assumption that a constitutive element of 
successful repayment requires that it be completed within the terms of the court order. 

Payment plan cases present special challenges for date-limiting the sample. Unlike cases that do 
not include a payment plan, which receive a concrete “pay-by” date, the majority of payment 
plan court orders include only the date that the first payment is due. As a consequence, relying on 
the relationship between the date included on the order and the date on which each county 
reported the case balance is neither an accurate nor reliable method for date-limiting such cases. 
To account for this limitation, an approximate “expected pay-by date” was calculated for 
payment plan cases by dividing the amount ordered by the monthly installment amount and 
extending the judgment date by the resulting number of months. For example, a case that is 
ordered to pay $200 and receives a $25 monthly payment plan has an expected installment term 
of 8 months; correspondingly, if the judgement for that case is ordered on January 1, 2022, then 
the expected date by which the amount ordered should be fully repaid is September 1, 2022. 
Payment plan cases were thus date-limited according to their expected pay-by date to ensure that 
the sample includes only those cases for which the expected installment term culminated before 
the date on which each county submitted collections data. 

=== PAGINA 27 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
21 

Some cases in the sample had their fines and fees reduced to zero and thus their debt fully 
forgiven. Because these cases need take no further action on their legal financial obligations, 
they were excluded from the analysis. In total, 201 cases were fully relieved of their debt during 
the MyCitations pilot. 

Imposing these constraints on the data yields a sample of 12,324 cases that, according to the 
terms of their court order, should have been fully paid by the date on which the collections data 
was received from each county. Within this sample, 4,734 included a payment plan and 7,590 
did not. 
Payment plan analysis 
In addition to assessing the nominal success rate for payment plan cases, the Judicial Council 
sought also to analyze the specific success rate for $25 monthly payment plans. These payment 
plans were selected both because $25 per month is contemplated in the program’s authorizing 
statute and because it is the monthly payment ordered with the greatest frequency. 

To produce this estimate, two additional steps were taken to date-adjust the data. First, rather 
than date-limiting the sample by the pay-by or expected-pay-by dates, the age of each case, in 
months, was calculated by taking the number of days elapsed between the judgment date and the 
date on which the corresponding county reported the case balance. For instance, if the difference 
between those two dates is 30 days or fewer, the case was assigned “one month” for its case age; 
likewise, if that difference is between 31 and 60 days, the case was assigned “two months”, and 
so forth. By calculating the monthly age for each case, the Judicial Council is able to discern 
whether cases for which the expected pay-by date occurs after the collections data was gathered 
are on track to be repaid within the terms of their installment plan. 

Second, cases were grouped into $25 order brackets, beginning with cases $99 or less and 
proceeding in $25 increments up to $500. Because each case in the sample includes a $25 
monthly payment plan, the total amount ordered through MyCitations functions as a proxy for 
the case’s installment term. Unlike the date-limited sample, this proxy serves as a range rather 
than a precise calendar date. For instance, a case for which the amount ordered falls within the 
$100 to $125 order bracket has an expected time to completion of between four to five months. 
This is because, at the bottom end of that bracket, $100 is consistent with four monthly payments 
of $25 while, at the upper end of that bracket, $125 is consistent with five like payments. 

For cases that were not fully repaid at the time of reporting, this approach offers two additional 
ways of measuring success. On one side, cases that are behind (“defaulted” on) the expected 
term of their payment plan are presumptively unsuccessful. For example, a case within the $100 
to $125 order bracket for which nine months has elapsed since its judgment date and that has not 
fully repaid its debt has fallen behind the four to five months expected for its installment term. 
With this approach we can discern the number of cases within each order bracket that have 
defaulted on the terms of their payment plan. On the other side, this approach also provides a 
way to estimate whether cases with time remaining in their expected installment plan are on pace 
to fulfill the terms of the plan on time. This is estimated by dividing the outstanding balance by 
the monthly payment amount and adding the resulting number of months to the case age. For 

=== PAGINA 28 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
22 

example, a case that has an outstanding balance of $100 would require four more $25 monthly 
payments to clear that balance. If four months has elapsed since its judgment date (i.e., the case 
is four months old), then the anticipated pay-off range is eight months (case age plus number of 
monthly payments remaining). Whether that case is ahead of or behind its installment schedule 
depends on the total amount ordered. Should that case have been ordered to pay $200, we would 
estimate that case is consistent with its repayment schedule; conversely, should that order be 
$150, we would estimate that case is at risk of default. 

The steps taken above constrain the data on the assumption that each litigant is paying only the 
amount required by their payment plan (e.g., $25 per month) and no additional amounts. To be 
sure, some litigants—perhaps many—pay more each month than what is required of by the terms 
of their payment plan. However, the precise extent of these cases is unknown. The collections 
data received from the pilot courts did not include a ledger of payments nor the date on which 
final payments were tendered. Without such data points, the portion of payment plans that repay 
ahead of schedule, based on the methods employed in this report, can serve only as a floor. 

=== PAGINA 29 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
23 

Appendix B: Zip Codes 
This Appendix documents the top five most common residential zip codes for MyCitations 
users in each county. “Usage Rate” represents the number of requests received from each 
residential zip code as a proportion of the total requests received from the corresponding county. 
Top Five Most Common MyCitations User Zip Codes by County Cumulative Data from April 
2019–September 1, 2022 
County 
Zip Code 
Usage Rate 
County Poverty Rate 
Zip Poverty Rate 
Fresno 
93702 
5.1 % 
43.32 % 
72 % 
Fresno 
93706 
4.2 % 
43.32 % 
66 % 
Fresno 
93722 
7.8 % 
43.32 % 
40 % 
Fresno 
93726 
4.0 % 
43.32 % 
54 % 
Fresno 
93727 
6.7 % 
43.32 % 
39 % 
Humboldt 
95501 
8.1 % 
40.46 % 
44 % 
Humboldt 
95503 
8.1 % 
40.46 % 
35 % 
Humboldt 
95519 
6.1 % 
40.46 % 
38 % 
Humboldt 
95521 
9.1 % 
40.46 % 
48 % 
Humboldt 
95540 
5.6 % 
40.46 % 
43 % 
Imperial 
85364 
2.5 % 
47.77 % 
46 % 
Imperial 
92227 
4.5 % 
47.77 % 
54 % 
Imperial 
92231 
7.8 % 
47.77 % 
46 % 
Imperial 
92243 
7.6 % 
47.77 % 
47 % 
Imperial 
92251 
3.6 % 
47.77 % 
24 % 
Modoc 
89431 
3.0 % 
40.62 % 
43 % 
Modoc 
89433 
3.0 % 
40.62 % 
42 % 
Modoc 
96101 
25.4 % 
40.62 % 
38 % 
Modoc 
97302 
3.0 % 
40.62 % 
26 % 
Modoc 
97603 
3.0 % 
40.62 % 
40 % 
Mono 
89521 
1.6 % 
24.19 % 
18 % 
Mono 
90026 
2.2 % 
24.19 % 
36 % 
Mono 
90650 
1.6 % 
24.19 % 
29 % 
Mono 
92335 
1.6 % 
24.19 % 
46 % 
Mono 
93063 
1.6 % 
24.19 % 
18 % 
Monterey 
93901 
4.1 % 
33.47 % 
33 % 
Monterey 
93905 
6.6 % 
33.47 % 
52 % 
Monterey 
93906 
12.2 % 
33.47 % 
31 % 

=== PAGINA 30 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
24 

County 
Zip Code 
Usage Rate 
County Poverty Rate 
Zip Poverty Rate 
Monterey 
93933 
4.2 % 
33.47 % 
32 % 
Monterey 
93955 
6.0 % 
33.47 % 
31 % 
Placer 
95621 
5.4 % 
17.14 % 
24 % 
Placer 
95648 
5.4 % 
17.14 % 
16 % 
Placer 
95678 
2.9 % 
17.14 % 
21 % 
Placer 
95747 
5.1 % 
17.14 % 
14 % 
Placer 
95765 
3.2 % 
17.14 % 
10 % 
San Benito 
93635 
4.0 % 
24.02 % 
42 % 
San Benito 
93901 
2.0 % 
24.02 % 
33 % 
San Benito 
93906 
4.0 % 
24.02 % 
31 % 
San Benito 
93924 
2.0 % 
24.02 % 
13 % 
San Benito 
95023 
62.0 % 
24.02 % 
26 % 
San Francisco 
94110 
2.3 % 
21.44 % 
19 % 
San Francisco 
94112 
3.8 % 
21.44 % 
21 % 
San Francisco 
94124 
4.8 % 
21.44 % 
36 % 
San Francisco 
94134 
2.3 % 
21.44 % 
25 % 
San Joaquin 
95205 
5.1 % 
33.33 % 
60 % 
San Joaquin 
95206 
9.0 % 
33.33 % 
48 % 
San Joaquin 
95207 
8.6 % 
33.33 % 
42 % 
San Joaquin 
95209 
5.8 % 
33.33 % 
24 % 
San Joaquin 
95240 
4.8 % 
33.33 % 
43 % 
San Luis Obispo 
93401 
8.0 % 
26.35 % 
27 % 
San Luis Obispo 
93420 
4.6 % 
26.35 % 
12 % 
San Luis Obispo 
93422 
4.6 % 
26.35 % 
22 % 
San Luis Obispo 
93444 
4.6 % 
26.35 % 
19 % 
San Luis Obispo 
93446 
10.3 % 
26.35 % 
26 % 
Santa Clara 
95020 
4.6 % 
16.73 % 
22 % 
Santa Clara 
95111 
3.9 % 
16.73 % 
30 % 
Santa Clara 
95122 
3.7 % 
16.73 % 
29 % 
Santa Clara 
95123 
3.6 % 
16.73 % 
13 % 
Santa Clara 
95127 
3.9 % 
16.73 % 
22 % 
Santa Cruz 
95003 
7.9 % 
26.05 % 
11 % 
Santa Cruz 
95005 
2.5 % 
26.05 % 
25 % 
Santa Cruz 
95060 
9.7 % 
26.05 % 
32 % 

=== PAGINA 31 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
25 

County 
Zip Code 
Usage Rate 
County Poverty Rate 
Zip Poverty Rate 
Santa Cruz 
95062 
9.4 % 
26.05 % 
24 % 
Santa Cruz 
95076 
15.8 % 
26.05 % 
36 % 
Shasta 
96001 
4.1 % 
33.62 % 
27 % 
Shasta 
96002 
4.4 % 
33.62 % 
38 % 
Shasta 
96003 
5.0 % 
33.62 % 
33 % 
Shasta 
96007 
2.5 % 
33.62 % 
38 % 
Tulare 
93257 
8.2 % 
48.30 % 
53 % 
Tulare 
93274 
6.7 % 
48.30 % 
44 % 
Tulare 
93277 
4.2 % 
48.30 % 
35 % 
Tulare 
93291 
4.5 % 
48.30 % 
33 % 
Ventura 
93003 
5.1 % 
23.69 % 
22 % 
Ventura 
93030 
8.7 % 
23.69 % 
34 % 
Ventura 
93033 
9.8 % 
23.69 % 
44 % 
Ventura 
93036 
4.8 % 
23.69 % 
32 % 
Ventura 
93065 
3.8 % 
23.69 % 
17 % 

=== PAGINA 32 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
26 

Appendix C: How the Tool Works 
MyCitations is designed as a straightforward way for the litigant to provide their financial 
outlook for consideration by the court. From a litigant’s perspective, the tool asks questions 
about income, benefits, household size, and expenses. But what happens after the litigant 
completes the request? 

Before a court begins using the tool it must configure the calculator’s settings with information 
specific to their jurisdiction’s identified policy choices. Specifically, courts must set two 
reduction rates for the calculator to apply to eligible infractions. The first is a flat rate reduction 
applied to infraction debt from litigants who indicate that they are in receipt of public benefits. 
For example, a court might configure the calculator to recommend a 60 percent reduction for 
litigants on public benefits. The second is a sliding reduction rate that is indexed to a litigant’s 
federal poverty level (FPL on the figure below) when they indicate that they do not receive 
public benefits. For instance, the calculator might be configured to recommend a 60 percent 
reduction for federal poverty level under 200 percent but a 50 percent reduction for levels over 
200 percent. 

The tool calculates a federal poverty score for each litigant based on income and household size. 
Indexing the sliding reduction to this score is prudent because it best represents material parity 
across litigants that nominal monthly income does not fully capture. For example, a $2,000 
monthly income is spread thinner in a household of four compared to a household of one; 
correspondingly, the household size adjusts the federal poverty score such that the same monthly 
income registers a score of 177 percent for the former but 87 percent for the latter. These scores 
are the variable that determines a litigant’s ability to pay, and the tool calculates a 
recommendation accordingly. The precise parameters for federal poverty scores that the tool uses 
to calculate recommendations are set at the local level by each court. 

These reduction rates are mutually exclusive, and the tool only supplies the court with one 
reduction to consider. If a litigant receives public benefits, the tool does not consider their 
income or household size to calculate a reduction. However, judicial officers are presented with 
that information nonetheless so that they are fully apprised of the litigant’s material situation. 
The judicial officer can accept, modify, or deny the reduction that the tool recommends. Figure 
12 illustrates the flow of information through the MyCitations tool. 

=== PAGINA 33 ===
Online Infraction Adjudication and Ability-to-Pay Determinations 
27 

