--- p1
FOOTAGE AUTHENTICITY: When the footage is uploaded to our secure server, the hash value is
calculated again and compared to the hash value recorded when the footage was taken. The
matching hash values demonstrate that there were no changes to the image since capture.
SECURE UPLOAD & STORAGE: eyeWitness uses end to end encryption and all footage is uploaded
in small encrypted packages to the eyeWitness server. The server itself is non-public facing,
secure, and access controlled.
When you take a photo or video with the eyeWitness to Atrocities app and upload your
footage to our secure server, you create a master, original photo or video that can be
used as evidence in investigations or trials. It can also be used to verify any copy that is
later circulated on social media, used in advocacy campaigns, or reported by the media. 
VERIFICATION
FOOTAGE LOCKED UNTIL UPLOAD: The app user cannot edit the footage or metadata. The user
also cannot immediately download or export their footage from the app. Instead, they will first
need to upload the original photo or video to the eyeWitness server for verification. Once
eyeWitness receives the footage, the user can download and keep a copy that they then can export
and share as normal, while eyeWitness protects the chain of custody. Footage taken from another
camera app or device cannot be uploaded to the server for verification.
DIGITAL FINGERPRINT: When footage is recorded with the app, it automatically generates a
unique identifying code based on pixels, known as a “hash value”. This hash value serves as a
digital fingerprint. When two images have a matching hash value, it demonstrates that the
images are identical. This step ensures that any subsequent changes to the footage can be
detected. 
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN YOU UPLOAD FOOTAGE TO 
EYEWITNESS TO ATROCITIES?
This document explains why it is necessary to upload your
footage to the eyeWitness server, as well as what happens to it
when it is there.
We do this in four ways: 
Courts require proof that no one has tampered with the footage at any point. In legal
terms, you need to maintain the chain of custody due to the risks of editing and altering
media and data. If your camera app allows you to export and download your footage and
metadata, then you have the ability to change them. If the chain of custody is broken, the
footage will no longer be reliable on its own. eyeWitness maintains the chain of custody
for its partners until the footage is used for justice. 
ADMISSIBLE AS EVIDENCE IN COURT

--- p2
CONSENT
If we have a partnership with you, we will contact you to seek your consent before
sharing any of your footage with investigators. For independent (non-partnership)
users, the app gives you the option of providing contact details to seek your
consent. We will only contact you after evaluating any potential security risk
involved with getting in touch. If you do not object to sharing the footage, we will
arrange for transfer of the information directly from us to the investigator to ensure
the chain of custody remains intact.
If you or your organisation are filing a court case or submitting an official
complaint to a human rights commission or other investigating body, and you want
to include the footage you have taken with eyeWitness, we can send the footage
and metadata directly to that body on your behalf, as well as a full explanation of
our technology and data handling protocols (e.g. as written affidavits or testimony
in court as an expert witness). Alternatively, if we have a partnership agreement
with you, we can also send the footage back to you.
You can remain anonymous if you wish. The app does not collect any identifying
information about the individual user, their phone, IP network, or MAC address. 
PRIVACY & ANONYMITY
FOR MORE INFORMATION OR TO PARTNER WITH US, GET IN TOUCH! 
+44 7394 090274 (Signal & WhatsApp)
www.eyewitness.global
@eyewitnessorg
general@eyewitness.global
eyewitnesstoatrocities
Achieving justice can take a long time, and using eyeWitness ensures that
potential evidence captured now can be used by mechanisms that may arise in
the future. eyeWitness was designed to meet admissibility standards and is seen
as a trusted source. We have relationships with investigative bodies at national,
regional, and international levels, both judicial and non‑judicial, and are regularly
contacted for information related to investigations they are undertaking. Similarly,
eyeWitness seeks out mechanisms that are looking into events our app users
have documented. 
USING YOUR FOOTAGE FOR JUSTICE
