--- p1
 
 
 
REVIEW OF OUT OF HOURS NOISE SERVICE  
To: 
Councillor Rosy Moore, Executive Councillor for Climate Change, 
Environment & City Centre 
 
Environment and Community Scrutiny Committee    
27th January 2022 
 
Report by: 
Claire Adelizzi, Team Manager – Environmental Health (Residential)  
Tel: 01223 457724 Email: claire.adelizzi@cambridge.gov.uk 
Wards affected: 
All 
 
 
Key Decision 
1. 
Executive Summary 
 
1.1 
The Council has a legal duty to investigate statutory nuisance within 
its area under the Environmental Protection Act 1990. However, the 
law does not specify how to exercise this duty, it is therefore the 
responsibility of each Local Authority to establish its own procedures 
for investigating complaints of noise that may amount to statutory 
nuisance. 
 
1.2 
The Councils Out of Hours Noise Service operated for the last 25 
years, which, until October 2019, operated 7pm – 7am Monday – 
Friday; and 9am – 5pm, and 7pm – 7am, respectively on weekends 
and Bank Holidays. This approach required significant staffing levels 

--- p2
and tied up staff time in reactive, rather than targeted pro-active 
service work. 
 
1.3 
The primary purpose of the previous Out of Hours Noise Service was 
to allow residents to log initial noise complaints and for officers to 
contact complainants to gather information and evidence to 
determine the existence of a statutory noise nuisance.  Referrals 
would then be made to the daytime team to take appropriate 
enforcement action in relation to applicable cases of ongoing noise 
disturbance persistently detrimentally affecting the quiet enjoyment 
of someone’s home. 
 
1.4 
Following a review of Council Out of Hours services, including noise, 
combined with a difficulty recruiting to Out of Hours Noise Service 
posts, and the availability of new ‘self-help’ evidence gathering 
technologies and equipment, the Council committed to trial a new 
Out of Hours Noise Service approach.  
 
1.5 
This trial moved away from residents having access to officers to 
discuss their complaint and / or request a visit out of hours, to all 
noise complaints being passed to daytime officers within 
Environmental Health to discuss their complaint and / or arrange a 
proactive, pre-arranged visit(s).  The trial adopted a proactive 
planned approach, supported by evidence gathering technologies 
and equipment, for witnessing of noise disturbances out of hours.  
This new approach enabled complaints to be triaged more effectively 
and for staff resources to be deployed in a more efficient way.   
 
1.6 
The trial of this new approach has been evaluated and the results 
fully support its adoption on a permanent basis, in place of the 
previous reactive and inefficient Out of Hours Service model. 
 
2. 
Recommendations 
 
The Executive Councillor is recommended to: 
 
1) Note the results of the pro-active and planned Out of Hours Noise 
Service trial; and 
2) Based on the trial evaluation results, to approve the adoption of 
the pro-active and planned Service approach on a permanent 

--- p3
basis, supported use of evidence gathering technologies and 
equipment, in place of the reactive and inefficient Service model.  
 
3. 
Background 
 
3.1 
Until October 2019, the Council’s Out of Hours Noise Service 
operated for 25 years on a reactive basis as follows:  7pm – 7am 
Monday – Friday; and 9am – 5pm, and 7pm – 7am, respectively on 
weekends and Bank Holidays.   
 
3.2 
There were formerly 1.5 FTE Noise Pollution Officers working on a 
shift rotation as well as volunteer enforcement officers from 
Environmental Health who covered certain shifts as necessary on a 
stand-by and call out payment arrangement. 
 
3.3 
In October 2019, owing to staff vacancies within the service and the 
commencement of a wider corporate review of the Councils out of 
hours services, the operation of the staffed Out of Hours Noise 
Service was reduced to 7pm – 7am, Thursday – Sunday; and 9am – 
5pm on Saturday and Sunday daytimes.  Then, in November 2020, 
owing to continuing staff resource challenges the service was 
reduced even further to 7pm – 7am Friday – Sunday; and 9am – 
5pm on Saturday and Sunday daytimes. 
 
3.4 
In November 2020, during this period of reduced staffed Out of 
Hours Noise Service availability, the Council adopted the use of ‘The 
Noise App’ offered by RH Environmental. The Noise App* was used 
in conjunction with existing noise monitoring equipment and the 
staffed reactive Out of House Noise Service, (for those customers 
unable to use ‘The Noise App’, the service has continued to offer 
paper diary sheets to record noise disturbance incidence). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*The Noise App’ is a digital tool used for investigating complaints about noise and anti-social behaviour, 
making it easier to triage such customer complaints and efficiently determine appropriate response and 
resolution.  
 

--- p4
 
 
3.5 
‘The Noise App’ has allowed officers to triage noise complaints and 
prioritise those where noise disturbance may amount to a statutory 
nuisance for which further investigation by the Council is necessary by 
law.  ‘The Noise App’ also acts as an important supplementary 
evidence source to any investigation.  It is also worth noting that ‘The 
Noise App’ has proven an invaluable business continuity service facility 
during the pandemic when the Council had to temporarily change 
working practices and minimise staff visits into homes and businesses 
within the City on health and safety grounds, limiting them to 
emergency scenarios only.   
 
3.6 
Following the introduction and promotion of ‘The Noise App’, the 
service has received a notable reduction in the number of Out of Hours 
Noise reports made to the Council.  Table 1 below indicates the number 
of out of hours calls received in comparison to previous years, prior to 
the App’s adoption.  It is important to note that these reports may 
include multiple reports of noise made to the Council relating to any one 
ongoing noise complaint investigation, as well as any one-off calls to 
the service, e.g. notification of house/ car alarms sounding. 
 
Table 1: Total annual number of out of hours noise reports to the 
Council   
 
Year 
Total no. out of hours noise reports received 
2018/19 
1398 
2019/20 
1222 
2020/21 
775 
 
3.7 
In autumn 2021, owing to continuing staff vacancies in the service and 
the effective performance of the ‘The Noise App’ and noise recording 
equipment, the Council agreed to trial offering only a proactive planned 
Out of House Noise Service approach, supported by these evidence 
gathering technologies and equipment.  The agreed trial period was 
between 1st October and 31st December 2021, with the results and 

--- p5
outcome being reported back to the Environment and Community 
Scrutiny Committee. 
 
3.8 
This trial period involved a move away from the previous offering of 
customers being able to contact the service out of hours to report an 
initial noise complaint and request a reactive noise witnessing visit from 
a Noise Pollution Officer and moved to the introduction of a revised 
triaging system for ongoing noise complaints.  This revised 
arrangement includes: 
 
i) 
Consideration of reported noise disturbance from recordings that 
customers have securely submitted to the Council for assessment 
via ‘The Noise App’ by daytime enforcement officers within 
Environmental Health.  These recordings may relate to noise 
disturbance adversely affecting residents of the City at any time of 
the day or night. 
ii) 
Any subsequent noise witnessing to establish nuisance in relation 
to an on-going, persistent noise complaint being addressed via 
use of the Councils noise recording equipment installed into 
customers / complainants’ homes, as well as via proactive pre-
arranged visits to complainants’ properties at a time of day when 
previous evidence gathered has established that they are likely to 
be being adversely affected by noise.  Such proactive pre-
arranged visits ensure that the existence of a statutory nuisance 
may be witnessed more efficiently at an earlier opportunity in the 
investigation process. 
 
3.9 
The trial did not require us to fill the 1.5 FTE vacancies from the Out of 
Hours Noise Service, the trial was staffed within existing daytime 
resource within Environmental Health.  Any planned visits out of hours 
were funded through overtime. 
 
3.10 It is important to note that, prior to the start of this trial, the Council’s 
‘Pollution, noise & nuisance’ web pages were updated to reflect the trial 
service changes; and the following internal and external stakeholders 
briefed on the changes, including City Homes Housing Officers, the 
Anti-Social Behaviour Team and Cambridgeshire Police. 
 
3.11 It is also important to note that, as part of the trial service, customers 
still had the ability to log reports of noise out of hours via the Council’s 

--- p6
out of hours call handling service, which is provided as part of the 
Council’s Shared CCTV Service with Huntingdonshire District Council.  
This ensures that any complaints such as those of alarms sounding can 
be logged at the time and reacted to the next working day to ensure 
that such one-off disturbances that may amount to a statutory nuisance 
are satisfactorily abated. 
 
3.12 Table 2 below gives a comparison of the total number of noise reports 
received by the Council from customers outside of office hours via 
CCTV during the trial period (1st October and 31st December 2021) and 
in each of the three preceding years.  
 
3.13 Table 2 below also provides confirmation of the actual number of staff 
attendance visits that were carried out reactively in respect of the noise 
reports received. 
 
Table 2: Total number of out of hours noise reports to the Council 
between 1st October and 31st December 2018 – 2021: 
 
Year 
Noise reports received out of 
hours 
(1st October – 31st December 
period) 
No. of staff 
attendances out of 
hours in relation to 
these noise reports 
2018 
324 
51 
2019 
249 
45 
2020 
102 
32 
2021 
10 
1 
 
3.14 These numbers clearly indicate that the revised noise investigation   
          procedure followed by daytime team investigating  
          officers during this trial period have been effective, in terms of the use     
          of other technologies and equipment to gather evidence of noise   
disturbance, without the need for customers to request a reactive visit 
to witness noise disturbance outside of office hours.  The information 
within paragraph 3.17 of this report confirms that where there would 
have been a larger number of out of hours noise reports to the reactive 
Out of Hours Noise Service in 2021, these have become several noise 
recordings securely submitted by those customers who have actioned 
the Councils recommendation to engage with ‘The Noise App’ to record 

--- p7
incidents of ongoing noise disturbance adversely affecting them which 
daytime Investigating Officers then work to assess. 
 
3.15 Table 3 below further reinforces the above findings by giving a 
comparison of how many noise complaints have been received by the 
Council during office hours over the trial period (1st October and 31st 
December 2021) and in each of three preceding years. 
 
Table 3: Total number of noise complaints to the Council between 
1st October and 31st December 2018 – 2021: 
 
 
Year 
Daytime noise complaints received  
(1st October – 31st December period) 
2018 
91 
2019 
103 
2020 
144 
2021 
120 
 
These numbers clearly indicate that customers are still approaching the 
Council to make their noise complaint during daytime hours, with total 
numbers of daytime noise complaints received by the Council remaining 
broadly the same as in the three preceding years.  Between 46% and 
56% of these noise complaint figures during the trial period each year 
related to noise disturbance to customers from various sources out of 
hours. 
 
3.16 Of the 120 noise complaints received during the trial, 21 were repeat 
complaints already under investigation prior to its start date (1st October 
2021).   
 
3.17 Of the new complaints received during the trial period, 27 have 
engaged with the ‘The Noise App’ facility to date.  These customers 
were provided with details of how to upload the App and use it to 
capture the noise disturbing them (that may amount to a statutory 
nuisance) and then forward their recordings safely and securely to the 
Council.  23 of these customers then went onto first use the App 
outside of office hours giving an indication that their complaints related 
to noise they were being disturbed by out of hours.  A total of 378 

--- p8
recordings were submitted to the Council for review from these 23 
customers, thus giving an indication of the number of additional reports 
of noise that would have been made to the Out of Hours Noise Service 
to react to prior to the trial. 
 
3.18 As part of the trial, the Council continued to conduct proactive pre-
arranged out of hours noise monitoring visits on a case-by-case basis, 
as approved by service managers. During the trial, 27 proactive pre-
arranged visits took place.  Of these, 26 have been conducted during 
office hours and 1 outside of office hours.  Table 2 within paragraph 
3.13 of this report confirms how the number of out of hours service 
officer attendance visits compares to this within preceding years.   To 
date these visits conducted within the trial period have led to necessary 
progression of noise complaint investigations but have not resulted in 
any noise nuisance being witnessed. 
 
3.19 It is important to note that during the trial period there have not been 
any formal complaints made to the Council in relation to there being no 
reactive out of hours noise witnessing service available to customers. 
 
3.20 The positive outcome of the trial, as evidenced above, supports the 
recommendation to permanently adopt the pro-active planned Out of 
Hours Noise Service approach, supported use of adopted evidence 
gathering technologies and equipment.  This approach is in line with 
what other comparator local authorities are providing and will enable 
the Council to realise efficiency savings, while maintaining a good 
quality service and fulfilling its statutory duty.   
 
3.21 A summary outline of the key service changes arising from the 
recommended new service approach is included table 4 below for ease 
of reference. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- p9
Table 4: Summary outline of key Out of Hours Noise Service 
changes: 
 
Former Reactive Out of Hours 
Noise Service Offering 
Trial Period revised service 
operation offering 
 
Reactive noise reporting. 
 
Telephone logging of out of 
hours noise reports. 
 
 
Reactive customer contact / out 
of hours officer complaint 
response. 
 
 
Submission of ‘Noise App’ 
recordings.  
 
Reactive noise witnessing visits 
to complainants’ homes. 
 
 
Proactive pre-arranged visits 
daytime & out of hours. 
 
 
Installation of noise recording 
equipment into complainants’ 
homes. 
 
 
  
4. 
Implications 
 
a) Financial Implications 
 
A move away from a reactive Out of Hours Noise Service in terms of 
witnessing of noise disturbance will lead to 1.5 FTE Noise Pollution Officer 
vacant posts being offered up as a £75.000.00 saving. 
 
b) Staffing Implications 
 
A move away from a reactive Out of Hours Noise Service in terms of 
witnessing noise disturbance would mean that approval could be sought 
for the other vacant 1 FTE Senior Technical Officer post within the 
Environmental Health Residential Team to be filled.  It is anticipated that 

--- p10
Recruitment to this daytime post would be more successful than previous 
attempts made to recruit to out of hours vacant positions.  This recruitment 
would be undertaken with support and advice from the Council’s 
Recruitment Team considering the current job market.   Recruitment to this 
vacant post would ensure that the revised daytime noise investigation 
procedure relating to noise from one domestic property affecting another 
being more efficiently managed amongst full complement of team 
resources, as well as ensuring increased resource to further private sector 
housing enforcement work, which is also overseen by the Residential 
Team.  
 
c) Equality and Poverty Implications 
 
Please see EqIA that accompanies this report. 
 
d) Net Zero Carbon, Climate Change and Environmental Implications 
 
There are no climate change or environmental related implications 
associated with this policy therefore the overall rating is ‘Nil’. 
 
e) Procurement Implications 
 
None. 
 
f) Community Safety Implications 
 
No additional community safety implications are envisaged in relation to 
this proposal.  The existing daytime noise service will remain to action 
customer complaints including providing advice and support to them in 
conjunction with relevant internal and external stakeholders as necessary.  
The Council’s out of hours call handling service will continue to log reports 
of noise made to the Council outside of office hours including offering 
customers appropriate signposting as necessary in relation to matters 
relating to their immediate safety. 
 
5. 
Consultation and communication considerations 
 
There is no requirement for any consultation in relation to this service area 
transformation review.  Prior to the start of the trial period the Council’s 
‘Pollution, noise & nuisance’ web pages and were updated along with 
internal and external stakeholders including City Homes Housing Officers, 
the Antisocial behaviour team and Cambridgeshire Police being briefed 
about this change. 

--- p11
 
This communication exercise can be conducted again as necessary upon 
the committee reaching a decision along with wider communication in the 
form of Council social media feed updates and a press release. 
 
6. 
Background papers 
 
Background papers used in the preparation of this report: 
 
Environmental Protection Act 1990 (legislation.gov.uk) 
 
7. 
Appendices 
 
None. 
 
8. 
Inspection of papers 
 
To inspect the background papers or if you have a query on the report 
please contact Claire Adelizzi, Team Manager - Residential, tel: 01223 
457724, email: Claire.adelizzi@cambridge.gov.uk. 
