--- p1
App user guide
Create an account
Creating a new case
7 Download The Noise App from the app store and click the Create an account button if you have not 
used The Noise App befor?
7 Enter your email addressJ
7 Begin typing the name of your reporting organisation to then select it from the drop-down menu, and 
click Continu?
7 Enter your first and last nameJ
7 Enter your phone numberJ
7 Enter your postcode and select the address from the drop-down menu (If your address does not appear, 
you can enter this information manually.)J
7 Create your password and click the Create an account buttonJ
7 Check your email to confirm your account and complete your account set-upJ
7 Please accept the terms and conditionsJ
7 Please allow The Noise App to access your microphone (to enable you to take recordings using the 
service), GPS and camera, if applicable.
7 When logging in to The Noise App for the first time, your case diary page will be blani
7 Click Add new case to submit your evidenc?
7 Select your reporting organisation: this can be found in Recently entered organisation_
7 Alternatively, if you wish to report to a different organisation, click on Search for new organisatioc
7 Click Continue
1

--- p2
App user guide
! To take your recording, tap on the microphone icon to start, and then tap once more to finish (There is a 
minimum requirement of 5 seconds, and depending on your organisation’s settings, you may be able to 
submit a maximum of a 30-, 45- or 60-second recording of the noise you are experiencing.
! You can listen back to the recording you have taken by clicking on the play butto)
! If you would like to start again, you have the option to retake the audiM
! Click ‘Continue’ to move on to the next pag:
! Select your own property address and click Continu%
! Enter the postcode of the address where the noise is coming from, or alternatively, use the map to drop 
a location pin, and the app will automatically fill in the address information for youI
! Click Continu%
! Select the noise source (the type of noise you are experiencing
! Select the location (the space within your property where you took the recording
! Provide information on how long the noise has been affecting you on this occasion, in hours and minute$
! Provide an intensity rating for how severe you feel the noise is for yoG
! In the free-text comment box, you can provide any additional information on the issu:
! On this page, you can also provide additional media (if your organisation allows this) such as picture 
and/or video (You can include up to 5 pieces of additional media, and videos can be limited to 30, 45 or 
60 seconds by your organisation.
! Click Continue to move forward with your reporB
! You will be presented with a summary of the information you have provided in your report (If changes are 
needed, you can click on the pencil icons to make the necessary amendments.
! Accept the declaration and click Submit to send your report to your reporting organisatio)
! You will see a confirmation page that indicates your report has been senB
! Click Continue to case diary.
2

--- p3
App user guide
Case diary
Settings
2 On your case diary page, you will now see the case you have create(
2 To report another address (if you are experiencing problems with more than one neighbour), select 
Report new address at the bottom of the screen to create additional cases – one for each property you 
are reporting agains?
2 To add additional recordings to an existing case, click on the Add recording button and follow the steps 
through to submissioQ
2 When you click on your case, you will see a summary of the information you have submitted to datI
2 To view notifications on your case/s, simply select the Notifications tab at the bottom of the screen and 
select from the list of open cases (if you have submitted more than one<
2 To message your reporting organisation, select the case from the notifications tab and use the 
messaging text box provided.
2 You can amend your personal details (name, phone number, email address and password) by tapping 
into your settings option in the navigation bar at the bottom of the screeQ
2 Help & Support will include our FAQs as well as some other guidance on how best to use The Noise 
App. There is a link to email our support team within this sectionT
2 If you wish to have access to your data, please contact your reporting organisation, and for all other 
technical queries you can contact our support team on 
.
support@thenoiseapp.com
3
