--- p1
The Noise App 
User Guide 
www.thenoiseapp.com 
 
Download  
To download the app go to the “App Store” for iPhone users or the “Play Store” for android 
users. Search for “The Noise App” and tap “Get” or “Install” to download the app.  For 
Android devices search “The Noise App RHE” and choose “Install” after selecting the app. 
Register  
Open the app and click on “Get Started”, select your country of residence and then click 
“Create an Account”, Fill in the details and select your Service Provider from the drop down 
menu. Agree to the terms of service and click Create Account. An email will be sent to your 
email address asking you to confirm your account. Once your account has been confirmed 
you can then begin submitting reports.  
Once your account has been confirmed log in to the app on your phone. This will prompt 
you to enter your address and complete the registration process. 
If your Service Provider runs a pre-approved policy, you will be informed by email and at the 
end of each report submission that you have not yet been confirmed by your Service 
Provider. Your reports will still be stored on your device but for them to be investigated you 
must contact your Service Provider and ask them to approve you.   
Language 
To change language, once logged in choose the menu button on the top left of the “Noise 
Diary” screen. You will see the option “Language”, here you can choose your desired 
language.    
Submit a complaint  
1. Record - After logging in for the first time to start recording press the circle icon at the 
bottom right of the screen. On the next page tap and hold the circular icon to begin 
recording. You don’t have to record the whole event – just a representative snapshot of the 
noise as it is happening. You can record up to 30 seconds and if you need to, you can make 
several recordings each one 30 seconds to be added to the same case.   
(Whilst recording on an iPhone you will see a wave form along with a timer that moves 
across the screen.  On Android devices the counter will count up to 30) 
When you remove your finger or thumb the app stops recording. Accept, reject or playback 
the recording.  

--- p2
2. Duration - First, how long has the nuisance affected you? Select the duration on the 
screen in hours/minutes/seconds. 
3. Source - Next, what type of noise is it? Scroll and choose a source from the list provided.  
4. Location - Next, where did you record the noise? Choose an area of your property from 
the list provided and move to the next screen.  
5. Intensity and commentary - You are then asked to rate the noise in terms of how loud 
you consider it to be. Underneath you may add a comment as to how the noise is affecting 
you, for example, you might state “the noise woke me up and is preventing me from getting 
back to sleep”.  This information about how the noise affects you is very important so 
please try to add as much information as possible.  
6. Address - Lastly, enter the address of where you believe the Noise Source to be coming 
from.  
7. Confirmation - If you are happy with the information presented on the confirmation 
screen press the “send report button”. If your Service Provider runs a pre-approved policy, 
you will be informed at this stage instead. (unless in offline mode in which case you will 
receive an email stating this when you reconnect to Wi-Fi or regain 3G/4G)  
8. Approval Needed – You may need to seek approval from your organisation before they 
receive your recordings and reports. If this is required of you, please check your emails as 
we will have emailed to inform you.  
9. Noise Diary Screen - Your first entry will populate your noise diary screen (the app’s 
home screen). The newest report will always appear at the top of the screen with all your 
previous reports listed below.  
On the left of your newly submitted report you will find a symbol. 1) two arrows directed in 
a spinning motion (
), this means it is still uploading and you will need to leave the app 
open to complete. You will also be able to confirm this by the loading circle spinning in the 
top right hand side of the app. 2) a tick within a circle (
), this means the report has been 
successfully uploaded to your Service Provider.  
If you select one of the entries in the diary and you will access two screens– the “detail” 
and “activity” screens.   
Switch between detail and activity screens using the tabs at the top.   
10. Detail Screen - provides a summary of the information relating to the particular diary 
entry you selected. (Please note: we do not supply playback of the recording for users.   
Once submitted only investigating officers can access these.)    
At the bottom of this screen you will find “Add Recording”. This is where you can continue 
to add recordings to an already on going complaint to help build your case. 

--- p3
11. Activity Screen - you will see a summary of activity related to that entry by you and the    
investigating officer. You may also add and receive messages from your investigator on this 
page. 
12. What next? - When you next log on you will be taken to your noise diary. Continue to 
make recordings and entries for as long as the problem continues. 
