 

Seattle DJC.com local business news and data - Environment - Portland designs new loo that's cheaper, cleaner, safer and solar

        ﻿

home
Welcome, 
sign in
 or 
click here
 to subscribe.
login

Saturday, October 3, 2026  

HOME

MyDJC

MyDJC Mainpage

MyDJC Manager

My Searches

BUSINESS

Events

People

Business Licenses

Bidding / RFP Center

Firms

CONSTRUCTION

Events & Education

People & Companies

Spotlight

Project of the Week

Upcoming Projects

Bid Calendar

Firms Directory

Bid Center

Today's bid results

Sub-Bids Requested

Building Permits

Rosters

A & E

People

Design Detailings

Project of the Week

Project Calendar

Bid Center

Firms Directory

Rosters

Federal Projects

Guidelines For Submission

REAL ESTATE/CREDIT

Top Property Sales

On the Block

Movers & Markets

People & Companies

Bid Center

Foreclosures

Liens 

Contract Acceptances 

ENVIRONMENT

Bids and RFPs

Federal Projects

Firms Directory

TECH

Bids and RFPs

Firms Directory

MONEY

Money Home

WEEKEND

Weekend Home

SPECIAL SECTIONS

   DJC Subscriptions

Subscribe / Renew

Subscribe to the DJC online, newspaper or plancenter.com

Contact Us 

Have a news item or subscription question?  Phone, E-mail, Directions

► Subscribe to our Free Weekly Newsletter

   Resource Center

Construction Bids 

Contracting, 

IFBs, 

Sub-Bids,  

RFPs,  

Rosters, 

Bids, 

Awards,

Upcoming Projects,

Building Permits, 

Specialty Contractors 

Plancenter.com 

Plans and specifications for Pacifc Northwest projects

Consultant Services 

A & E Bids,

RFPs, 

SOQs,

Rosters  

Misc. Goods and Services 

Bids,

RFPs, 

SOQs,

Rosters  

Public Notices 

Legal Notices,  

Government Notices,  

City Notices 

Firm Directory 

The Northwest's top

Consultants and

Contractors 

Building Permits

Listings of building permits from around the Northwest 

Real Estate 

RFPs,   

Sales 

Credit 

Liens 

Business Licenses 

Complete Archives of WA Business Licenses 

Special Sections 

 See our recent publications 

Editorial Calendar

 Check out our upcoming special sections for 2026

Classifieds 

DJC.com Classified advertisements

   DJC Services

Publish a Notice

Place your legal notice in the DJC

Advertise

Market your business to decision makers around the Northwest

Reprints

Order a reprint in hard copy, PDF or linked HTML.

Plans

Add your firm as a planholder.  Upload a plan to plancenter.

Contact Us 

Phone, E-mail, Directions

 	  In Today's Public Notices

FEATURED NOTICE

City of Milton
Interurban Trail Connection 

New Bid Calls
7

New Consultant Notices
3

New Supply Bids
2

   New Sub Bids Requested

RENTON HIGH SCHOOL REPLACEMENT PROJECT - MACC 04 - MAIN CONSTRUCTION BID GROUP 2:
Skanska USA Building Inc.
RENTON HIGH SCHOOL REPLACEMENT PROJECT - MACC 04 - MAIN CONSTRUCTION BID GROUP 1:
Skanska USA Building Inc.
2023 COUNTY SAFETY PROGRAM - FEDERAL AID PROJECT #: TA-7838
Dirt & Aggregate Interchange, Inc.
DSHS OB2 3RD FLOOR - HCLA REMODEL - DEPT. OF ENTERPRISE SERVICES
Kassel & Associates
PORT OF SEA BUILDING 161E RENOVATION AND SYSTEMS RETROFIT
PCL Construction Services, Inc.
more »

Environment

﻿
 print

 email to a friend

 reprints

add to mydjc

April 17, 2012

Portland designs new loo that's cheaper, cleaner, safer and solar
It costs about $60,000 to manufacture and the annual maintenance runs $12,000 apiece.
By STEVEN DUBOIS
Associated Press 

AP Photo/Rick Bowmer

[enlarge]

Rodney Haven of Clean and Safe washes down the exterior of a Portland Loo. The city has patented the  solar-powered restroom, which is designed to give people relief and ward off crime. Sales agents get a 10 percent cut to help the city take in more cash.

PORTLAND — The Portland Loo might be the most loved public toilet — not that there's much competition.

A lack of adequate public restrooms is an old complaint in cities across America. The bathrooms, when you can find one, are often filthy and smelly, and a magnet for drug users and vandals. Businesses such as McDonald's and Starbucks often serve as the restroom of last resort.

Big cities from New York to San Francisco have bought high-tech, self-cleaning automatic toilets, with mixed results. In one high-profile failure, Seattle installed five such toilets in 2004 — at a cost of $5 million — only to sell them on eBay four years later because of problems with drug use and prostitution.

Meanwhile, the much cheaper Portland Loo maintains a Facebook page and has 202 followers on Twitter. The five downtown toilets average about 200 flushes each per day. And, unlike toilets in other cities, have not drawn a torrent of criticism about foul smells and rampant crime.

Now Portland is trying to sell its patented loo to other cities. The city has sold one to Victoria, British Columbia, and now hopes contracting with agents who make a commission will generate more sales.

“We can ship them to somebody for $99,000 and all they have to do is bolt them on to their sidewalk and hook them up to sewer and water,” said City Commissioner Randy Leonard, who originated the idea for the loo after Portland had its own publicized failure with public bathrooms.

The solar-powered Portland Loo costs about $60,000 to manufacture and the annual maintenance has run $12,000 apiece. The drab, durable structures stand 10-feet tall and have open slots that expose a standing person's head and feet, allowing police to check for lawbreakers. The metallic-gray finish is resistant to graffiti. The toilet itself is prison-grade and there is no sink to break. A tiny faucet for hand-washing is outside and a worker cleans the loos twice a day.

The toilets were designed with the assumption that people would try to ruin them. Vandals have busted the locks and the flush button, but even the first loo installed in 2008 remains in pretty good shape.

“The whole idea behind it was to design it not as this beautiful, aesthetic piece of work and then be aghast if somebody did something bad to it,” Leonard said. “We designed it anticipating all of that.”

San Diego and Anchorage have expressed interest in buying the loo. Lori Schanche, who works for the city of Anchorage, said the loo's resistance to vandalism is what piqued her interest. She said Anchorage needs public restrooms because of a large street population, and durability is important because youths sometimes throw rocks down the toilet.

To help generate sales that would defray maintenance costs, the Portland council voted to allow three contractors to market the toilet: Curtis Banger, who provided design services for the loo; Madden Fabrication, which manufactures the loo; and Carol McCreary, founder of the Portland advocacy group PHLUSH — Public Hygiene Lets Us Stay Human.

All are eligible to receive 10 percent of the sales price as a commission.

“Without having toilets integrated into the streetscape, health and livabilty are impossible for the good percentage of people we call restroom challenged,” McCreary said.

Portland has traditional bricks-and-mortar public bathrooms, but they have the same problems as those in other cities and are kept locked at night. The city tried a unique approach in 2007, when then-Mayor Tom Potter — in response to demands from the homeless for a 24-hour restroom — opened City Hall as an all-night bathroom.

The controversial plan failed because the homeless congregate away from City Hall.

Leonard said it was around that time that he took a trip to Italy and got the idea for the unisex and utilitarian Portland Loo.

“There were these public restrooms that were shocking by American standards because they weren't so private; they were pretty revealing,” Leonard said. “Really, the only reason we build the restrooms we do in the United States is because of our puritan roots. We don't want anybody to see us or certainly hear us.”

MyDJC
 |  
Business
 | 
Construction
 | 
Real Estate
 | 
Architecture & Engineering
 | 
Environment
 | 
Machinery
 | 
Technology
 | 
Weekend

Copyright 2026 Seattle Daily Journal of Commerce

                        | 
Terms of Service
 | 
Privacy Policy
 | 
Contact Us
 | 
Advertising
 | 
Site Index

﻿

Email or user name:

Password:

Forgot password? Click 
here.

