 
 Apply for a good behaviour period | Service NSW 
 Home 
 Find services 
 Driving and transport 
 Apply for a good behaviour period
 If your driver licence has been suspended, you may be able to apply for a good behaviour period of 12 months. 
 Listen 
 Introduction
 If you have an unrestricted NSW Driver Licence and you've received a notice of suspension due to excessive demerit points, you may be eligible to elect a 12-month good behaviour period.
 You must apply to elect a good behaviour period before your suspension starts.
 You can apply online   if there are at least 2 business days left before your suspension. 
 Note : You cannot change your mind and choose the suspension after you've applied for the good behaviour period. Before you apply, make sure you read the  conditions .
 Eligibility
 You're eligible if:
 your suspension letter states you can apply for the good behaviour period
 the suspension period has not started
 you hold at least one unrestricted NSW Driver Licence.
 You are not eligible if:
 your suspension letter does not mention the good behaviour period
 you only hold a provisional or learner licence.
 What you need
 a MyServiceNSW Account (optional). to continue as a guest, you need your plastic NSW Driver Licence card or NSW Photo Card
 your notice of suspension letter.
 How to apply
 Read the conditions of the good behaviour period .
 Select the 'Apply online' button.
 Log in, create a MyServiceNSW Account, or continue as a guest. 
 Follow the prompts to submit your application.
 If your application is successful:
 you'll get a digital receipt straight away
 you'll receive a letter of confirmation in the post within 14 business days
 you can continue to drive as long as you meet the conditions .
 Note : If your suspension is due to start within 2 business days, you need to apply at a Service NSW Centre . Take your supporting documents with you.
 Conditions
 If your application is successful, you'll need to meet the conditions of the good behaviour period for 12 months.
 If you need to take a Driver Knowledge Test, the good behaviour period will start after you have passed. If you do not pass before your suspension starts, all your licences will be suspended until you have passed.
 If you get 2 or more demerit points during the 12 months, all your licences will be suspended for double the original suspension period.
 After the 12 months, the demerit points on your suspension notice will be cleared from your licence, unless you: get 1 demerit point during the 12 months
 have other points not listed in your suspension notice. 
If these points take you over 13 demerit points, you may receive a new suspension notice.  
 Links
 Demerit points, penalties and offences – Transport for NSW 
 Alcohol and drug driving offences – Transport for NSW 
 Related transactions
 Check your demerit points 
 Apply to increase your demerit points limit – professional drivers only 
 Request a driving record 
 Back to top 
 Last published: 24 March 2026
 An error occurred loading the sharing widget.
 Load the sharing widget 
 Rate the information on the page
 An error occurred loading the form. Reload the form 
 An error occurred loading the footer.
 Reload the footer 
