
 Special hardship order - qld.gov.au 
 --> 
 Skip to main content 
 Skip to main navigation 
 qld.gov.au 
 Delivering for Queensland - Queensland Government 
Find services
Business Queensland
Government employees
Contact us
 Search 
 Menu 
 Delivering for Queensland - Queensland Government 
 Search 
 Popular 
 Public holidays 
 Driver licence 
 Car rego 
 Apply for a Blue Card 
 Find a JP 
 Menu 
 Close 
 Home 
 Menu
 Expand 
 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples 
 Community support 
 Crime and justice 
 Education 
 Emergency services and safety 
 Environment, land and water 
 Family, relationships, births and deaths 
 Health 
 Housing 
 Jobs and work 
 People with disability 
 Queensland's government 
 Recreation, sport and arts 
 Seniors 
 Transport 
 Youth 
 Find services
 Business Queensland
 Government employees
 Contact us
 Home 
 Transport 
 Road safety, rules, fines and tolls 
 Fines and enforcement 
 Demerit points 
 Special hardship order
 In this section 
 Demerit points 
 About demerit points 
 Demerit points schedule 
 Check my demerit points 
 Learner licence demerit points 
 Provisional licence demerit points 
 Open licence demerit points 
 Double demerit points 
 Special hardship order 
 Special hardship order
 A special hardship order is a court order that allows a driver with a suspended Queensland  provisional or open licence to continue driving under restricted and specific conditions.
 Note : Special hardship orders are different from a restricted (work) licence , which you may be eligible to apply for if you've been convicted of a  drink or drug driving offence.
 Eligibility for special hardship orders
 1. To be eligible to apply for a special hardship order 
 Your licence must have been suspended because you:
 gained 2 or more demerit points while driving under a good driving behaviour period
OR
 committed a high speed driving offence (more than 40km/h over the speed limit).
 2. To receive a special hardship order 
 You must convince the court that the licence suspension would cause one or both of the following:
 extreme hardship to you or your family by depriving you of your means of earning a living
OR
 severe and unusual hardship to you or your family for other reasons, such as transporting a family member to medical appointments.
 You are not eligible to apply if: 
 the licence that was suspended was a Queensland learner licence
 you hold a driver licence issued outside of Queensland.
 You are also not eligible to apply for a special hardship order if, within the 5 years before your driver licence was suspended:
 your Queensland driver licence was cancelled or suspended, including if you were granted a special hardship order
 you were disqualified from holding or obtaining a Queensland driver licence
 your authority to drive in Queensland on a non-Queensland driver licence was suspended
 you were made ineligible to apply for a Queensland driver licence because you either
 incurred excessive demerit points
 were convicted of driving more than 40km/h over the speed limit while unlicensed
 you were convicted of operating a vehicle dangerously.
 However, you may still be eligible to apply for a special hardship order if you have received:
 a suspension for failing to appear in court to answer a drink or drug driving charge
 an immediate licence suspension because of an alleged drink or drug driving offence
 a 24-hour suspension because of a matter relating to drink or drug driving
 a suspension or cancellation set aside on review by the Department of Transport and Main Roads
 a suspension or cancellation because of mental or physical incapacity
 a suspension imposed by the State Penalties Enforcement Registry
 a suspension or cancellation set aside on review by the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
 Applying for a special hardship order
 How to apply
 To apply for a special hardship order:
 complete a special hardship order application, available from a Magistrates Court or transport and motoring customer service centre 
 lodge the application and supporting evidence (e.g. an affidavit from you, your employer or your doctor) and your ‘Notice of driver licence suspension’ with the Magistrates Court in the district where you live after your suspension has started. 
 once accepted and stamped by the court, give a copy of the application and affidavit to the Department of Transport and Main Roads at least 7 days before the court hearing date.
 Your licence suspension will be lifted until the day before the court hearing.
 Note: You’ll need to pay a fee when lodging your application with the Magistrates Court. Contact the court for fee information. There is no additional fee for lodging the forms at a transport and motoring customer service centre.
 Contact us if you have more queries about special hardship orders.
 Important information
 Always lodge your application and affidavit with the Magistrates Court before providing a copy to the Department of Transport and Main Roads.
 Do not drive until after you have given a copy of your application, stamped by the court, to the Department of Transport and Main Roads. Only then will your suspension be lifted.
 If you have your application but not your affidavit, give the Department of Transport and Main Roads the court-stamped copy of the application and provide the affidavit at least 7 days before the court hearing date.
 Completing an affidavit
 An affidavit is a legal document used to provide facts about a matter. For a special hardship order application, include information that you will rely on for the application, such as:
 the hours you need to drive for work purposes
 why there is no other transport reasonably available for you to get to or from work
 the fact that you’re the only person available to drive a family member with a medical condition or physical incapacity to receive regular and necessary medical treatment.
 Sign and witness the affidavit in the presence of a Justice of the Peace or Commissioner of Declarations. Find a JP or Cdec .
 Get an affidavit form from Australia Post, a Magistrates Court or your legal representative.
 If the magistrate grants your application
 If the magistrate grants your special hardship order application, you’ll need to get a replacement licence by completing a Replacement driver licence/driver licence receipt/licence label application (F3006) and paying the fee. Your replacement licence will have an ‘X3’ condition code, which means you may drive only while carrying, and in accordance with, a special hardship order.
 The special hardship order applies for the suspension period stated on your suspension notice, from the date of the court order (Any part of your licence suspension that you serve before the special hardship order is granted will not reduce the special hardship order period.)
 If you don’t comply with the restrictions of your special hardship order, the court may impose a fine of more than $3,300 and disqualify you from holding or obtaining a driver licence for a set period.
 Once the period ends, you can have your licence reissued (at no charge) without the X3 condition.
 If your circumstances change, you may wish to vary the restrictions of your special hardship order. Complete a ‘Variation of special hardship order or section 79E order’ (F4375) and lodge it with the Magistrates Court.
 While you are on a special hardship order a zero-demerit point limit applies. If you accumulate any demerit points, your licence will be suspended for double your order period.
 If the magistrate refuses your application
 If the magistrate refuses to grant a special hardship order, your licence suspension is reapplied for the remaining period less any time served before you lodged your application.
 Withdrawing your application
 To withdraw your special hardship order application, send a letter to the Magistrates Court stating that you no longer wish to proceed with the application.
 The court will send confirmation and your suspension will start again from the withdrawal date.
 Note: Your licence suspension period doesn’t start again until your application is accepted and dealt with by the magistrate.
 Send a copy of your letter and court confirmation to us by either:
 email: specialhardshiporder@tmr.qld.gov.au 
 mail:
 Department of Transport and Main Roads
 SHO Processing Section
 PO Box 673
 Fortitude Valley Qld 4006.
 Fine increase
 On 1 July 2026 our fines and penalties increased by 3.5% in line with the government's indexation policy.
 Last updated: 
 1 July 2025 
 Was this page helpful? Was this page helpful? Yes 
 No 
Tell us why (optional)
Do not include any personal information. If you need a response, please use our
 contact us page.
 This site is protected by reCAPTCHA.
 Submit 
 Queensland Government
 Contact us
 Get in touch for enquiries, feedback, complaints and compliments.
 Contact us
 Phone: 13 QGOV (13 74 68) 
 Help 
 Copyright 
 Disclaimer 
 Privacy 
 Right to information 
 Accessibility 
 Jobs in Queensland Government 
 Other languages 
 Follow us
 Facebook 
 Facebook page 
 LinkedIn 
 LinkedIn page 
 Instagram 
 Instagram page 
 Cultural acknowledgement
 We pay our respects to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander ancestors of this land, their spirits and their legacy. The foundations laid by these ancestors—our First Nations peoples—give strength, inspiration and courage to current and future generations towards creating a better Queensland.
 © The State of Queensland
 1995 - 2026
