 Demerit points | Victoria Legal Aid 
 Skip to main content 
 Disclaimer: The material in this print-out relates to the law as it applies in the state of Victoria. It is intended as a general guide only. Readers should not act on the basis of any material in this print-out without getting legal advice about their own particular situations. Victoria Legal Aid disclaims any liability howsoever caused to any person in respect of any action taken in reliance on the contents of the publication.
 We help Victorians with their legal problems and represent those who need it most. Find legal answers, chat with us online, or call us. You can speak to us in English or ask for an interpreter. You can also find more legal information at www.legalaid.vic.gov.au 
 Menu ⁠ 
 How we can help ⁠ 
 I need legal information about ⁠ 
 About us ⁠ 
 For lawyers ⁠ 
 Contact us ⁠ 
 Search ⁠ 
 Quick exit Home 
 I need legal information about 
 Going to court 
 Going to court for a criminal charge 
 Demerit points 
 Demerit points
 You can get demerit points against your drivers licence for some traffic offences. If you get too many points your licence may be suspended. 
 On this page
 What are demerit points? 
 What are the demerit point limits? 
 What is a demerit point option notice? 
 When are demerit points added to my licence? 
 When are demerit points removed? 
 Demerit points and other suspensions or cancellations 
 Drivers who are unlicensed or from overseas 
 How do I nominate another driver? 
 How do I ask for the fine to be reviewed? 
 Can I challenge the offence in court? 
 Other support 
 This page explains demerit points and what getting demerit points might mean for you. It also explains the process if you decide to challenge the offence in court.
 What are demerit points?
 The demerit points system aims to encourage drivers to drive safely. You will get one or more demerit points (or penalty point) for some driving offences. The VicRoads website has a list of demerit point offences .
 The points are recorded against your driver licence or learner permit.
 If you get too many demerit points you risk having your licence suspended.
 What are the demerit point limits?
 There are different limits for how many demerit points you can get depending on what sort of licence you are on:
 full licence-holders – no more than 11 demerit points within any three-year period
 learner or P-plate driver – no more than 11 demerit points within any three-year period, and no more than four demerit points within any 12-month period.
 Limits also apply for motorcycle learner permits and full licences, and for drivers with overseas licences. The VicRoads website has a full list of demerit point limits .
 If you go over the demerit point limit for your licence or permit, VicRoads will send you a demerit point option notice.
 What is a demerit point option notice?
 This is a letter that sets out two options for you to choose from:
 you can accept your licence suspension and stop driving for the suspension period, or
 you can choose to extend your demerit point period, which means you can keep your licence or permit but you must not get any more points (or lose your licence for any reason) for the next 12 months. If you do get more demerit points or lose your licence you will be suspended for double the amount of time originally offered to you.
 If you do not reply to VicRoads within 21 days, they will suspend your licence. The date that the suspension starts is written on the demerit point option notice.
 VicRoads will send a reminder two weeks before the suspension period starts.
 The VicRoads website has more information about what to do if you are issued with a demerit point option notice .
 What if I choose the suspension period?
 Your licence will be suspended for:
 three months for the first 12 demerit points
 one month for every four extra points.
 What does being suspended mean?
 If you are suspended from driving this means you have lost your licence and you must not drive at all during this time. There are no exceptions. For example, you cannot drive to work or to pick up your children. There are very serious penalties for driving while suspended .
 You may:
 be fined
 have to go to jail
 have your vehicle impounded (taken away) for 30 days.
 What if I choose to extend my demerit point period but then get more points?
 If you choose to keep your licence and then get another demerit point or have your licence suspended or cancelled for another offence during the extended 12-month period you get your licence will be suspended for twice as long as it would have if you had chosen the original suspension.
 If your licence is suspended for exceeding demerit points and also for some other offence, both suspensions can be served at the same time.
 When are demerit points added to my licence?
 Demerit points are added to your licence when VicRoads is notified. For example:
 when you pay an on-the-spot fine (or when a fine is not paid after the due date)
 when an interstate road authority notifies VicRoads about a driving offence that happened when you were driving in that state
 if a court finds you guilty of a driving offence.
 Demerit points are counted from the date that the offence allegedly happened, even if they are not recorded by VicRoads until later.
 You can check your demerit points and driver history on the VicRoads website .
 When are demerit points removed?
 Demerit points will be removed from your licence after you have:
 served your licence suspension period, or
 driven for 12 months without getting any more demerit points or having your licence suspended for another offence.
 If you have successfully completed the 12-month period without getting any more points, all demerit points on your licence when the option notice was issued will be removed. Any demerit points you got after this will remain on your licence.
 Most demerit points expire and are removed from your licence after four years.
 Demerit points and other suspensions or cancellations
 If you get too many demerit points and also have your licence suspended for another offence, VicRoads will suspend your licence for having too many demerit points. You will not have the option of extending the demerit point period.
 Drivers who are unlicensed or from overseas
 If you are an unlicensed driver or you hold an overseas licence, you can be disqualified from driving if you get 12 or more demerit points while driving in Victoria.
 If you are under 22 years old you can also be disqualified if you get five demerit points or more within any 12 month period.
 A disqualification notice will tell you when the disqualification period begins. VicRoads may wait until you return to Victoria before sending this notice.
 How do I nominate another driver?
 If you were not driving your vehicle when the offence happened you can apply to Fines Victoria to nominate another driver . You must apply before you get a notice of final demand.
 How do I ask for the fine to be reviewed?
 If you don’t believe you should have been fined for the offence that led to the demerit points, you can write to the agency that issued the fine to ask for a review . If the agency withdraws the fine, you won’t get demerit points. The agency cannot review your fine if it was for a drink-driving, drug-driving or excessive speed offence.
 You may also be able to seek an enforcement review of the fine from the Director of Fines Victoria. If the director cancels the enforcement of the fine, then any demerit points added to your driver’s licence for that fine must be removed. If the agency decides to issue a charge and summons for the offence, then the points will be added again if you are found guilty in court.
 Can I challenge the offence in court?
 Unless VicRoads made a mistake when counting up the number of demerit points you have, the only way that you can do something about demerit points is if you decide to plead not guilty and challenge the offence in court .
 Demerit points will not be recorded against your licence or permit if the magistrate finds that:
 you are not guilty
 the police made some mistake about your charge.
 Points will be added if you are found guilty. The number of demerit points you get is set and recorded by VicRoads. Once a decision is made the magistrate has no power over demerit points and they cannot remove demerit points.
 You can only appeal if there was a mistake in counting the demerit points. The VicRoads website has more information about the grounds for appeal . You should get legal advice before you appeal. If you lose the appeal, you might have to pay.
 Other support
 For more information, support and referrals, visit other support for fines and infringements . 
 I need legal information about 
 Updated 20 February 2026 
 In this section
 How we can help 
 Speak to us 
 Where you can get free legal advice 
 Help at court 
 Help Before Court for criminal charges 
 Ask for Help Before Court 
 How Help Before Court can help you 
 Help Before Court privacy statement 
 Legal help for First Nations people 
 Help in your language 
 Amharic/አማርኛ 
 Arabic / عربي 
 Bosnian/Bosanski 
 Burmese/ျမန္မ 
 Chinese Traditional/繁體中文 
 Croatian/Hrvatski 
 Dari/دری 
 Dinka/Thuɔŋjäŋ 
 Easy English 
 English translation 
 Farsi/فارسی 
 Filipino/Filipino 
 Greek/Ελληνικά 
 Hindi/हिंदी 
 Italian/Italiano 
 Khmer/ខ្មែរ 
 Korean/한국어 
 Macedonian/Македонски 
 Malay/Bahasa Malaysia 
 Nuer/Thok Nath 
 Oromo/Oromoo 
 Pashto/پښتو 
 Polish/Polski 
 Punjabi/ਪੰਜਾਬੀ 
 Russian/Русский 
 Serbian/Cрпски 
 Sinhalese/සිංහල 
 Somali/Soomali 
 Spanish/Español 
 Tamil/தமிழ் 
 Thai/ภาษาไทย 
 Tigrinya/ትግርኛ 
 Turkish/Türkçe 
 Ukrainian/Українська 
 Urdu/اردو 
 Vietnamese/Tiếng Việt 
 Support if you are deaf or find it hard to hear or speak on the phone 
 Deaf or hard of hearing appointment enquiry 
 Help if you are in prison 
 I need legal information about ... 
 Legal issues we can't help with 
 I need legal information about 
 Arson, fires and fireworks 
 Business and commercial issues 
 Consumer complaints 
 Intellectual property 
 Contracts 
 Other support 
 Door-to-door sales 
 Centrelink 
 Allowances and payments 
 Who can get Centrelink payments? 
 Disagreeing with a Centrelink decision 
 Centrelink overpayments and offences 
 Your rights if Centrelink investigates you 
 Other support 
 Courts and the legal system 
 Victoria's courts and tribunals 
 Commonwealth courts and tribunals 
 How laws are made 
 Dispute resolution 
 Legal words 
 Other support 
 Debt and bankruptcy 
 Debt 
 Debtors' rights 
 Debt collection 
 Creditors' options to recover a debt 
 Creditor notices and letters of demand 
 Options before legal action if you owe money to a creditor 
 Notice of legal action – being sued 
 Filing a defence against a creditor in the Magistrates' Court 
 Court orders and judgment 
 Summons for oral examination 
 Instalment orders for outstanding debts 
 Bankruptcy 
 Warrants to seize and sell property 
 Reasons you might not have to pay your debt 
 Other support for debt and bankruptcy 
 Defamation 
 Discrimination 
 Discrimination and victimisation 
 Vilification and acts of hatred 
 Disability discrimination 
 Disability discrimination and employment 
 Pregnancy and parental discrimination at work 
 Sexual orientation and gender identity discrimination 
 Making a complaint about discrimination 
 Remedies to a complaint about discrimination 
 Other support 
 Disputes with neighbours 
 Fences and trees 
 Noise and pets 
 Injuries on your property and your safety 
 Other support 
 Drugs and alcohol 
 Drug possession 
 Public intoxication 
 Say rượu nơi công cộng và cảnh sát (Public intoxication and police) – Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese) 
 السُكر في الأماكن العامة والشرطة (Public intoxication and police) – عربي (Arabic) 
 नशे की हालत में जनता के बीच होना और पुलिस (Public intoxication and police) – हिन्दी (Hindi) 
 ਜਨਤਕ ਤੌਰ 'ਤੇ ਨਸ਼ਾਖੋਰੀ ਕਰਨਾ ਅਤੇ ਪੁਲਿਸ (Public intoxication and police) – ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi) 
 公共場合醉酒與警方 (Public intoxication and police) – 繁體中文 (Traditional Chinese) 
 Employment 
 Difference between employees and contractors 
 Employment contracts and conditions 
 Minimum rates of pay and getting paid properly 
 Giving notice to end employment 
 Termination of employment 
 Superannuation and complaints 
 Working with Children check 
 If you disagree with a Working with Children Exclusion 
 Workplace safety 
 Workplace bullying and discrimination 
 Speaking to your employer about discrimination 
 Other support 
 Fines and infringements 
 On-the-spot fines and infringement notices 
 Dealing with fines 
 Getting a fine reviewed 
 Exceptional circumstances 
 How to make a special circumstances application 
 Special circumstances 
 Payment plans for fines 
 Unpaid fines and Fines Victoria 
 Penalty units 
 Toll fines 
 Family violence scheme 
 Work and development permits 
 COVID-19 and fines 
 Other support 
 Going to court 
 Going to court for a criminal charge 
 Community corrections orders 
 Going to court – pleading guilty 
 Going to court – pleading not guilty 
 Going to court – diversion 
 Going to court – rehearings 
 Possible outcomes for criminal offences 
 Representing yourself in a criminal case 
 Serious criminal charges 
 Appealing a Magistrates' Court decision 
 Criminal records 
 Demerit points 
 Going to court – what I want to say in court 
 Going to court – writing a character reference 
 Going to court for traffic offences 
 Possible outcomes for traffic offences 
 Demerit points 
 Going to court to challenge a fine 
 Going to court about your special circumstances 
 Possible outcomes and penalties from a special circumstances application for a fine 
 Going to court to divide property 
 Going to court to get a divorce 
 Going to court for a sexual assault case 
 Going to court for a family violence intervention order – respondent 
 Going to court for a family violence intervention order – affected family members 
 Going to court as a witness 
 How to behave in court 
 Other support 
 Guardianship and administration orders 
 Guardianship orders 
 Administration orders 
 Going to VCAT for guardianship and administration order hearings 
 Changing or cancelling an order 
 Other support 
 Guns and other weapons 
 Home and property 
 Dividing your property after a relationship ends 
 If you agree on dividing property 
 If you disagree on dividing property 
 Protecting your right to property 
 Renting 
 Homelessness 
 Rooming houses 
 Caravan parks 
 Building, buying and selling houses and land 
 Theft and property damage 
 Other support 
 How to run a family law case 
 Immigration and migration 
 Ways of migrating to Australia 
 Appealing a visa decision 
 Mandatory visa cancellations 
 Bridging visas – Code of Behaviour 
 Debts owed under the Status Resolution and Support Services program 
 Other support 
 Mental health and disability 
 Mental health and your rights 
 Having control over your treatment 
 Rights of people receiving compulsory treatment 
 Compulsory treatment orders 
 Electroconvulsive treatment 
 Going to the Mental Health Tribunal 
 When police are called because of your mental health condition 
 What happens at the police station if you have a cognitive disability 
 Insurance discrimination – your rights if you have a mental health condition 
 National Disability Insurance Scheme 
 Your review rights and the National Disability Insurance Scheme 
 Disability Support Pension 
 What is a program of support? 
 Other support 
 Owning a dog 
 Parenting arrangements, child contact and child support 
 Parenting arrangements and child contact 
 If you agree on parenting arrangements 
 Parenting orders 
 Applying for parenting orders 
 Living with parenting arrangements 
 Relocating or travelling with children 
 What the court considers when making a parenting order 
 Supervised time between parents and children 
 Caring for children when you are not their parent 
 Abduction 
 Airport watch list order kit 
 Recovery order kit 
 Child support 
 Adult child maintenance for over-18s 
 Child support agreements 
 Child support assessment 
 Child support payments 
 Childbirth expenses 
 Disagreeing with a child support decision 
 Enquire about a child support appointment 
 Family Tax Benefit and child support 
 Proving who the other parent is 
 Other support 
 Police powers and my rights 
 Speaking to the police 
 Getting searched by the police 
 Being arrested 
 Fingerprints and body samples 
 Identification parades and photos 
 Being released from police custody 
 Complaints about police 
 Other support 
 Public transport offences 
 Common public transport offences 
 Protective services officers 
 Public transport inspectors 
 Other support 
 Relationships 
 Divorce, separation and marriage annulment 
 Divorce 
 Financial support from an ex-partner 
 Marriage annulment 
 De facto relationships 
 Using family dispute resolution 
 Sex and the law 
 Age of consent 
 Sexual assault 
 Reporting sexual assault to the police 
 Sexting and child abuse material 
 Contraception, pregnancy and abortion 
 Other support 
 Sexual harassment 
 Street law and graffiti 
 Street law 
 Graffiti 
 Other support 
 The ban on Nazi symbols and gestures in Victoria 
 Traffic offences 
 Driving and accidents 
 Leaving the scene of a vehicle accident 
 Driving offences 
 Careless driving 
 Drink driving 
 Driving while suspended or disqualified 
 Drug driving 
 Speeding 
 Unlicensed driving 
 Running a red light 
 Use of a mobile phone while driving 
 Failure to wear a seatbelt 
 Breach of road rules 
 Driving an unregistered vehicle 
 Parking laws and fines 
 P-plate and learner drivers 
 Hoon driving 
 Cycling and skating 
 Other support 
 Victims of crime 
 Reporting a crime 
 Financial assistance and compensation 
 Victim impact statements 
 Other support 
 Violence, abuse and personal safety 
 Family violence and family violence intervention orders 
 Applying for a family violence intervention order 
 If you are a respondent in a family violence intervention order application 
 Respondent options for dealing with a family violence intervention order 
 Children and family violence intervention orders 
 Family violence safety notices 
 What the police can do about family violence 
 What can happen at a family violence intervention order hearing 
 How information and referral officers can help with family violence matters 
 When a family violence intervention order starts and ends 
 Breaching a family violence intervention order 
 Change, extend or appeal a family violence intervention order 
 Getting a lawyer for cross-examination in a family violence intervention order hearing 
 Child protection 
 Personal safety intervention orders 
 When you can get a personal safety intervention order 
 Conditions in a personal safety intervention order 
 Using mediation to sort out disputes 
 Violent behaviour 
 Get a lawyer for hearings with cross-examination in the Federal Circuit and Family Court 
 Other support 
 Wills, estates and powers of attorney 
 Powers of attorney 
 Wills and estates 
 Making a valid Will 
 Changing a Will 
 Challenging a Will 
 If someone dies without a Will 
 Administration of the estate 
 Other support 
 Young people and the law 
 Bullying online or at school 
 Young people and the police 
 Young people and fines 
 Work if you’re under 15 
 Underage drinking 
 Youth allowance and payments for young people 
 Intervention orders for children and young people (under 18) 
 Information for young people about child abuse and neglect 
 Other support for young people and the law 
 Videos about the law 
 Dealing with door-to-door sales – videos 
 The unexpected side-effect of pregnancy: discrimination 
 About us 
 Careers 
 Work with us 
 Recruitment privacy statement 
 Employee benefits and conditions 
 First Nations employment 
 First Nations clerkship program 
 First Nations graduate law program 
 Aboriginal community engagement officers 
 New Lawyers Program 
 News 
 Legal Aid Brief newsletter 
 Subscribe to Legal Aid Brief 
 Who we are 
 Our vision, purpose and values 
 Our leaders and partners 
 Our Board 
 Senior leadership 
 Our partners Collaborative Planning Committee 
 Community legal centres 
 Gippsland Legal Assistance Forum 
 National Legal Aid 
 Our history 
 What we do 
 Our services 
 Help before court for criminal charges 
 Help at court 
 Legal helpline for First Nations people 
 Help if you are in prison 
 Pre-Court Engagement Service for family violence matters 
 Family dispute resolution Kids Talk 
 Family dispute resolution practitioners at our Family Dispute Resolution Service 
 Child specialists at our Family Dispute Resolution Service 
 Property dispute resolution 
 Working with First Nations families 
 Family Advocacy and Support Services 
 Independent Family Advocacy and Support 
 Independent Mental Health Advocacy 
 Mental Health Legal Rights Service 
 Remand Support Service 
 Specialist sexual harassment and discrimination law services 
 Victims Legal Service 
 Community legal education and information Free publications and resources 
 How we support community legal information 
 Law for helpers 
 Making community legal information 
 Subscribe to our community legal education update 
 Using artificial intelligence for your legal problem 
 Our law library Public Law Library Catalogue 
 A–Z of legal research resources 
 Legislation 
 Law journals 
 Case law 
 Legal dictionaries, abbreviation and citation guides 
 Our advocacy and law reform 
 Learning from the failures of Robodebt Robo-debt client stories 
 Raise the age of criminal responsibility to 14 
 Care not custody - keeping kids in residential care out of the courts 
 Change the culture, change the system – end sexual harassment at work 
 A safe, accessible and inclusive family law system 
 Centring rights, supported decision-making and recovery in Victoria’s mental health system 
 Rethinking intervention orders against children and teenagers 
 Transforming child protection to support families and children to thrive 
 Our plans, strategies and reports 
 Strategy 30 Previous strategies 
 Outcomes framework 
 Corporate plan Previous corporate plans 
 Quarterly reports 
 Annual report Previous annual reports 
 Our commitment to diversity and inclusion 
 Equitable briefing strategy 
 Client Priority and Capability Policy 
 Climate change strategy 
 Client experience surveys 
 Gifts, benefits and hospitality registry 
 Procurement 
 Freedom of Information - our information statements 
 Information for our clients 
 Who is eligible for help 
 Paying for a lawyer 
 What is a charge? 
 What is a contribution? 
 If you disagree with a grants decision 
 Your rights as a client What to expect from our services 
 Freedom of information 
 Privacy Policy 
 Reporting improper conduct 
 Child Safe Standards 
 How we treat victims of crime – our commitment to the Victims’ charter 
 For lawyers 
 Doing legal aid work 
 Briefing Victoria Legal Aid Chambers 
 Criminal Trial Preferred Barrister List 
 Who is on the list 
 About the list 
 How to apply: expressions of interest 
 Entry requirements and assessment guidelines for barristers 
 Criminal trial advocacy competencies 
 Removal or suspension from the list 
 Exceptions to briefing preferred barristers 
 Our pilot Equity and Diversity List for barristers and advocates 
 Duty lawyer services 
 Guidelines for approved private practitioners 
 Private practitioner duty lawyers' responsibilities 
 Payments and records management for private practitioner duty lawyers 
 Payments and records management for Children’s Court Family Division 
 Duty lawyers in the Family Division of the Children's Court (child protection matters) 
 Duty lawyer and Help Before Court guidelines for criminal charges in the Magistrates’ Court 
 Co-ordinators and reporting offices for duty lawyers 
 Private practitioner duty lawyer scheme to deal with conflicts 
 Duty Lawyer Guidelines for personal safety intervention orders 
 Private Practitioner Short Service Scheme Contracts 
 Invoicing for legal aid work by barristers 
 Legal assistance for the Royal Commission into the Management of Police Informants 
 Seeking and recovering costs in legal aid matters 
 The mixed model of service delivery 
 Trial Counsel Development Program 
 Junior Counsel 
 Lead Counsel 
 Identifying trials 
 Practitioner panels 
 Apply for panel membership 
 Panels conditions 
 Quality Assurance – maintaining the quality of our services 
 The practice standards 
 Partner firms we work with that provide legal aid 
 Log in to Atlas 
 ATLAS updates and support 
 ATLAS training 
 Register to use ATLAS 
 Terms of use for ATLAS 
 ATLAS user guides 
 Grants guidelines 
 Criminal law guideline changes 
 Family law guideline changes 
 Allocation of work guideline 
 Grants enquiries 
 Practice resources 
 Access to LawHub 
 Accredited Specialisation 
 Civil law resources 
 Criminal law resources 
 Psychological and psychiatric reports for plea hearings 
 Family law resources 
 Family law trial practice tools 
 State children, youth and families law 
 Child protection case planning and reviews 
 Child protection in the Family Division of the Children’s Court 
 Guide to youth control orders for lawyers 
 Intervention orders affecting children old enough to give direct instructions 
 Youth Crime 
 Fact sheets for clients 
 Changes to our services due to COVID-19 
 Using our Family Dispute Resolution Service 
 Chairpersons 
 Child consultants 
 Handbook for lawyers 
 Staff only 
 Contact us 
 Our offices 
 Speak to your lawyer 
 Media queries 
 Complaints 
 I have a complaint about somebody receiving legal aid 
 I have a problem with a Victoria Legal Aid lawyer or service 
 I have a problem with an independent children’s lawyer 
 Help in your language 
 Support if you are deaf or find it hard to hear or speak on the phone 
 Related links
 Fines and infringements 
 Going to court for a criminal charge 
 VicRoads – Driving offences & demerit points 
 Going to court - what I want to say in court 
 Print this page Share this page
 Facebook 
 X (formerly Twitter) 
 LinkedIn 
 WhatsApp 
 Email 
 Back to top 
 Legal Help Chat 
 How we can help 
 I need legal information about 
 About us 
 For lawyers 
 Contact us 
 The Victorian Government acknowledges Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people as the Traditional Custodians of the land and acknowledges and pays respect to their Elders, past and present.
 Site map 
 Privacy 
 Accessibility 
 Disclaimer 
 Copyright 
 Acknowledgement of Country 
 Staff only 
 © Copyright State Government of Victoria
 