
 Universal Credit: What you'll get - GOV.UK
 Cookies on GOV.UK
 We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
 We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
 We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.
 You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. 
 You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. 
 Accept additional cookies 
 Reject additional cookies 
 View cookies 
 Hide cookie message
 Skip to main content 
 GOV.UK 
 Navigation menu
 Menu
 Menu 
 Services and information
 Benefits 
 Births, death, marriages and care 
 Business and self-employed 
 Childcare and parenting 
 Citizenship and living in the UK 
 Crime, justice and the law 
 Disabled people 
 Driving and transport 
 Education and learning 
 Employing people 
 Environment and countryside 
 Housing and local services 
 Money and tax 
 Passports, travel and living abroad 
 Visas and immigration 
 Working, jobs and pensions 
 Government activity
 Departments 
 Departments, agencies and public bodies
 News 
 News stories, speeches, letters and notices
 Guidance and regulation 
 Detailed guidance, regulations and rules
 Research and statistics 
 Reports, analysis and official statistics
 Policy papers and consultations 
 Consultations and strategy
 Transparency 
 Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports
 Search GOV.UK
 ×
 Search GOV.UK
 Search
 Search GOV.UK 
 Search
 Home 
 Benefits 
 Benefits and financial support if you're on a low income 
 Universal Credit
 Skip contents 
 Contents
 What Universal Credit is 
 Eligibility 
 What you'll get
 How your wages affect your payments 
 How you're paid 
 How to claim 
 Your claimant commitment 
 Get an advance or other financial support 
 Report a change of circumstances 
 Contact Universal Credit 
 What you'll get
 Universal Credit is paid monthly . How much you get depends on:
 your standard allowance
 any extra amounts that apply to you
 any money taken off your payment
 if you’re working, how much you earn 
 See how much you could get by using a benefits calculator .
 Standard allowance
 You’ll get one standard allowance for your household.
 How much you’ll get 
 Monthly standard allowance 
 If you’re single and under 25 
 £338.58 
 If you’re single and 25 or over 
 £424.90 
 If you live with your partner and you’re both under 25 
 £528.34 (for you both) 
 If you live with your partner and either of you are 25 or over 
 £666.97 (for you both) 
 Extra amounts
 You may get more money on top of your standard allowance if you’re eligible.
 You will need to report changes when you become eligible for an extra amount. They are not added automatically. For example, if you become a carer you need to tell DWP. The carer’s element of Universal Credit is not automatically applied if you start getting Carer’s Allowance.
 If you have children
 You’ll get £303.94 a month for each child that lives with you.
 If your first child was born before 6 April 2017, you’ll get an extra £47.94 a month for that child.
 You get money for each child until the 31 August after their:
 16th birthday
 19th birthday, if they’re in eligible education or training – for example, they’re studying for GCSEs, A levels, BTECs, Scottish Highers and SVQs or NVQs up to level 3
 If your child has a disability
 You might get an extra monthly amount if any of your children are disabled.
 You’ll either get:
 £164.79 - the lower amount
 £514.71 - the higher amount
 The higher amount is for a child who:
 gets the highest rate of the care component of Disability Living Allowance (DLA) for children 
 gets the higher rate of the daily living part of Personal Independence Payment (PIP) 
 is blind or severely sight impaired
 The lower amount is for a child who gets any other rate of either DLA for children, or PIP.
 Childcare costs
 You can claim back up to 85% of your childcare costs if you’re working. If you live with your partner both of you need to be working, unless one of you is unable to work due to a disability or health condition.
 The childcare needs to be from a registered provider. You can get help paying for childcare including nurseries, childminders, breakfast clubs, after school care and holiday clubs.
 The most you can get each month is:
 £1,071.09 for one child
 £1,836.16 for 2 or more children
 You need to pay your childcare costs up front and claim the money back as part of your payment. You can get support to help you pay your childcare costs up front. Talk to your work coach after you’ve made your claim.
 Read more about childcare costs and Universal Credit .
 If you have a disability or health condition
 You might get an extra monthly amount if you cannot work because of a health condition, disability or long-term illness.
 How much you’ll get 
 Extra monthly amount 
 If you have a severe health condition or disability that’s unlikely to change or you are nearing the end of your life 
 £429.80 
 If your health condition or disability is assessed as less severe or your condition may improve over time 
 £217.26 
 There are different rules if you reported a health condition before 6 April 2026 .
 If you live with your partner and you both have limited capability for work and work-related activity, you’ll only get one extra monthly amount. You’ll get the higher amount if one of you is eligible for it.
 If you get the severe disability premium and you’re moving to Universal Credit, you might also be entitled to a ‘transitional protection’ payment.
 Read more about health conditions, disability and Universal Credit .
 If you care for someone who gets a health or disability-related benefit
 You could get an extra amount known as a ‘carer’s element’. This is added to your Universal Credit if you care for someone who gets one of the following benefits:
 Adult Disability Payment – standard or enhanced award 
 Armed Forces Independence Payment  
 Attendance Allowance 
 Child Disability Payment – middle or highest care award 
 Constant Attendance Allowance - full day rate, intermediate rate or exceptional rate with Industrial Injuries Disablement Benefit
 Constant Attendance Allowance - full day rate with a War Disablement Pension
 Disability Living Allowance – middle or highest care rate 
 Personal Independence Payment – either rate of the daily living part 
 You need to provide care for them for at least 35 hours a week.
 You’ll get an extra monthly amount of £209.34. If you live with your partner and you both care for the same person, you’ll only get one extra monthly amount.
 You may also be eligible for Carer’s Allowance .
 This is on top of any extra amount you get if you have a disabled child.
 If you are getting an extra amount because you have limited capability for work and work related activity (LCWRA), you cannot also get the carer’s element.
 If the person you care for gets the severe disability premium, it will stop when you claim the carer’s element of Universal Credit.
 Housing costs
 You could get money to help pay your housing costs . The payment can cover rent and some service charges.
 If you’re a homeowner, you might be able to get a loan to help with interest payments on your mortgage.
 Money taken off your payment
 Your payments might be reduced if any of the following apply:
 you are paying back an advance on a Universal Credit payment
 you would get above the amount limited by the benefit cap 
 you’ve been overpaid benefits in the past
 you owe money for Council Tax, court fines, electricity, gas, water or Child Maintenance
 you pay your gas or electricity bill directly from your Universal Credit payment
 you have a paid job 
 you have other income – for example, money from pensions or certain other benefits
 you have more than £6,000 in money, savings and investments 
 If you have over £6,000 in money, savings and investments, your payment will be reduced by £4.35 for every £250 you have between £6,000 and £16,000. Another £4.35 is taken off for any remaining amount that is not a complete £250.
 Find out more about money taken off your Universal Credit payment .
 Benefits that affect how much Universal Credit you get
 You can get Universal Credit at the same time as other benefits. Your Universal Credit payment will be reduced by an amount equal to the other benefit’s payment. This applies when you get Universal Credit and any of the following benefits:
 Armed Forces Pensions
 Carer’s Allowance
 Carer Support Payment (Scotland)
 Incapacity Benefit
 Industrial Injuries Disablement Benefit (excluding any increases where constant attendance is needed and for exceptionally severe disablement)
 Maternity Allowance
 Severe Disablement Allowance
 State Pension
 Widowed Mother’s Allowance
 Widowed Parent’s Allowance
 New Style Employment and Support Allowance ( ESA )
 New Style Jobseeker’s Allowance ( JSA )
 Claiming Universal Credit and New Style ESA or JSA 
 You might be able to get Universal Credit at the same time as New Style ESA or JSA . If you do, your Universal Credit payment is reduced by the amount you get for New Style ESA or JSA .
 New Style ESA and JSA are paid more regularly than Universal Credit.
 You’ll also get different National Insurance credits which count towards your State Pension and can help you qualify for other benefits.
 You might continue to get New Style ESA or JSA if your circumstances change and your Universal Credit payment is reduced or stops. For example, this could happen if:
 your partner’s income increases
 you have more than £16,000 in savings
 Check if you’re eligible for:
 New Style Jobseeker’s Allowance 
 New Style Employment and Support Allowance 
 Moving to Universal Credit from other benefits
 If you’ve applied for Universal Credit, you’ll keep getting your current benefit paid for 2 more weeks. You must still be eligible for your current benefit.
 This only applies if you’re getting income-related Employment and Support Allowance or Housing Benefit.
 You will not need to pay back the extra payments and they will not affect the Universal Credit you might get.
 If you’ve received a Migration Notice letter telling you to claim Universal Credit, you might also get a ‘transitional protection’ payment .
 Other support you could get
 If you receive Universal Credit you may also be able to get other financial support depending on your circumstances.
 If your Universal Credit claim is reviewed
 Your claim might be reviewed to make sure you’re getting the right payment and support. Find out more about Universal Credit reviews .
 Previous : Eligibility 
 Next : How your wages affect your payments 
 View a printable version of the whole guide
 Related content
 Sign in to your Universal Credit account 
 Benefits calculators 
 Housing Benefit 
 Self-employment and Universal Credit 
 Sign in to a service 
 Collection
 Universal Credit: detailed information for claimants 
 Universal Credit: information for employers 
 Universal Credit: for claimants who receive a Migration Notice letter 
 Universal Credit: information for stakeholders and partners 
 Universal Credit: information for landlords 
 Explore the topic
 Benefits and financial support if you're caring for someone 
 Benefits and financial support if you're looking for work 
 Benefits and financial support if you're on a low income 
 Benefits and financial support if you're temporarily unable to work 
 Benefits and financial support when someone dies 
 topics " data-ga4-event='{"event_name":"select_content","type":"related content"}' href="#">
 Show 3 more topics 
 Benefits and financial help , Caring for someone , and Finding a job 
 Is this page useful?
 Maybe
 Yes this page is useful 
 No this page is not useful 
 Thank you for your feedback
 Report a problem with this page
 Help us improve GOV.UK
 Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.
 This field is for robots only. Please leave blank 
 What were you doing? 
 What went wrong? 
 Send 
 Cancel 
 Help us improve GOV.UK
 To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
 Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab ) .
 Cancel 
 Services and information
 Benefits 
 Births, death, marriages and care 
 Business and self-employed 
 Childcare and parenting 
 Citizenship and living in the UK 
 Crime, justice and the law 
 Disabled people 
 Driving and transport 
 Education and learning 
 Employing people 
 Environment and countryside 
 Housing and local services 
 Money and tax 
 Passports, travel and living abroad 
 Visas and immigration 
 Working, jobs and pensions 
 Government activity
 Departments 
 News 
 Guidance and regulation 
 Research and statistics 
 Policy papers and consultations 
 Transparency 
 How government works 
 Get involved 
 Support links
 Help 
 Privacy 
 Cookies 
 Accessibility statement 
 Contact 
 Terms and conditions 
 Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg 
 Government Digital Service 
 All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 , except where otherwise stated
 © Crown copyright 
