
 The Fines Collection Regulations 2006 
 Skip to main content 
 Skip to navigation 
 legislation.gov.uk 
 https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk Cymraeg 
 Home 
 Explore our collections 
 Research tools 
 Help and guidance 
 What's new 
 About us 
 Search Legislation 
 Search Legislation
 Title: (or keywords in the title) 
 Year: 
 Number: 
 Type: All UK Legislation (excluding originating from the EU) -------------------------------------------- All Legislation (including originating from EU) -------------------------------------------- All Legislation originating from the EU that is amended by the UK -------------------------------------------- All Primary Legislation     UK Public General Acts     UK Local Acts     UK Private and Personal Acts     Acts of the Scottish Parliament     Acts of Senedd Cymru     Acts of the National Assembly for Wales     Measures of the National Assembly for Wales     Church Measures     Acts of the Northern Ireland Assembly     Acts of the Old Scottish Parliament     Acts of the English Parliament     Acts of the Old Irish Parliament     Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain     Local Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain     Private and Personal Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain     Northern Ireland Orders in Council     Measures of the Northern Ireland Assembly     Acts of the Northern Ireland Parliament -------------------------------------------- All Secondary Legislation     UK Statutory Instruments     Welsh Statutory Instruments     Scottish Statutory Instruments     Northern Ireland Statutory Rules     Church Instruments     UK Ministerial Directions     UK Ministerial Orders     UK Statutory Rules and Orders     Northern Ireland Statutory Rules and Orders -------------------------------------------- All Legislation originating from the EU     Regulations originating from the EU     Regulations originating from the EU that are amended by the UK     Decisions originating from the EU     Decisions originating from the EU that are amended by the UK     Directives originating from the EU     European Union Treaties -------------------------------------------- All Draft Legislation     UK Draft Statutory Instruments     Scottish Draft Statutory Instruments     Northern Ireland Draft Statutory Rules -------------------------------------------- All Impact Assessments     UK Impact Assessments 
 Search 
 Advanced Search 
 The Fines Collection Regulations 2006
 You are here:
 UK Statutory Instruments 
 2006 No. 501 
 PART 3
 Table of Contents 
 Content 
 Explanatory Memorandum 
 More Resources 
 Previous:
 Part 
 Next:
 Part 
 Plain View 
 Print Options 
 What Version
 Latest available (Revised) 
 Original (As made) 
 Advanced Features
 Show Geographical Extent (e.g. E ngland, W ales, S cotland and N orthern I reland) 
 Show Timeline of Changes 
 Opening Options
 Open whole Instrument 
 More Resources
 Original: King's Printer Version 
 View more 
 Changes over time for: PART 3
 Alternative versions:
 27/03/2006 - Amendment 
 Changes to legislation:
 There are currently no known outstanding effects for The Fines Collection Regulations 2006, PART 3. 
 Changes to Legislation
 Revised legislation carried on this site may not be fully up to date. At the current time any known changes or effects made by subsequent legislation have been applied to the text of the legislation you are viewing by the editorial team. Please see ‘Frequently Asked Questions’ for details regarding the timescales for which new effects are identified and recorded on this site.
 PART 3 E+W Attachment of Earnings 
 Tables and calculation method for attachment of earnings orders E+W 
 5.   In the case of an attachment of earnings order made under Schedule 5, the employer shall make deductions from P’s earnings in accordance with the following tables and regulations 6 to 15— 
 Tables of Periodical Deductions from Earnings
 Table A Deductions from Weekly Earnings (1) Attachable Earnings (2) Percentage deduction rate 
 Not exceeding £55 0 
 Exceeding £55 but not exceeding £100 3 
 Exceeding £100 but not exceeding £135 5 
 Exceeding £135 but not exceeding £165 7 
 Exceeding £165 but not exceeding £260 12 
 Exceeding £260 but not exceeding £370 17 
 Exceeding £370 17 in respect of the first £370 and 50 in respect of the remainder. 
 Table B Deductions from Monthly Earnings (1) Attachable Earnings (2) Percentage deduction rate 
 Not exceeding £220 0 
 Exceeding £220 but not exceeding £400 3 
 Exceeding £400 but not exceeding £540 5 
 Exceeding £540 but not exceeding £660 7 
 Exceeding £660 but not exceeding £1,040 12 
 Exceeding £1,040 but not exceeding £,1480 17 
 Exceeding £1,480 17 in respect of the first £1,480 and 50 in respect of the remainder. 
 Table C Deductions from Daily Earnings (1) Attachable earnings (2) Percentage deduction rate 
 Not exceeding £8 0 
 Exceeding £8 but not exceeding £15 3 
 Exceeding £15 but not exceeding £20 5 
 Exceeding £20 but not exceeding £24 7 
 Exceeding £24 but not exceeding £38 12 
 Exceeding £38 but not exceeding £53 17 
 Exceeding £53 17 in respect of the first £53 and 50 in respect of the remainder. 
 Commencement Information
 I1 Reg. 5 in force at 27.3.2006, see reg. 1(1) 
 6.   Subject to regulations 7 and 8, the sum to be deducted by an employer under an attachment of earnings order on any pay-day shall be— E+W 
 (a) where P’s earnings from the employer are payable weekly, a sum equal to the appropriate percentage of the attachable earnings otherwise payable on that pay-day; and for this purpose the appropriate percentage is the percentage (or percentages) specified in column 2 of Table A in regulation 5 in relation to the band in column 1 of that Table within which the attachable earnings fall; 
 (b) where his earnings from the employer are payable monthly, a sum equal to the appropriate percentage of the attachable earnings otherwise payable on that pay-day; and for this purpose the appropriate percentage is the percentage (or percentages) specified in column 2 of Table B in regulation 5 in relation to the band in column 1 of that Table within which the attachable earnings fall; and 
 (c) where his earnings from the employer are payable at regular intervals of a whole number of weeks or months, the sum arrived at by— 
 (i) calculating what would be his weekly or monthly attachable earnings (the “notional attachable earnings”) by dividing the attachable earnings payable to him by the employer on the pay-day by that whole number of weeks or months, as the case may be, 
 (ii) ascertaining the percentage (or percentages) specified in column 2 of Table A (if the whole number is of weeks) or of Table B (if the whole number is of months) in regulation 5 in relation to the band in column 1 of that Table within which the notional attachable earnings calculated under paragraph (i) fall, and 
 (iii) calculating the sum which equals the appropriate percentage (or percentages) of the notional attachable earnings for any of those weeks or months and multiplying that sum by the whole number of weeks or months, as appropriate. 
 Commencement Information
 I2 Reg. 6 in force at 27.3.2006, see reg. 1(1) 
 7.   Where regulation 6 applies and the amount to be paid to P on any pay-day includes an advance in respect of future pay, the sum to be deducted on that pay-day shall be the aggregate of the amount which would otherwise fall to be deducted under regulation 6 and— E+W 
 (a) where the amount advanced would otherwise have been paid on a single pay-day, the sum which would have been deducted on that pay-day in accordance with regulation 6 if the amount advanced had been the amount of attachable earnings on that day; or 
 (b) where the amount advanced would otherwise have been paid on more than one pay-day, the sums which would have been deducted on each of the relevant pay-days in accordance with regulation 6 if— 
 (i) an equal proportion of the amount advanced had been paid on each of those days; and 
 (ii) the attachable earnings of P on each of those days had been an amount equal to that proportion. 
 Commencement Information
 I3 Reg. 7 in force at 27.3.2006, see reg. 1(1) 
 8.   Where the amount payable to P on any pay-day is reduced by reason of an earlier advance of pay, the attachable earnings of P on that day shall, for the purposes of regulation 6, be the attachable earnings less the amount of that deduction. E+W 
 Commencement Information
 I4 Reg. 8 in force at 27.3.2006, see reg. 1(1) 
 9.   Subject to regulations 10 and 11, where P’s earnings from the employer are payable at regular intervals other than at intervals to which regulation 6 applies, the sum to be deducted on any pay-day shall be arrived at by— E+W 
 (a) calculating what would be his daily attachable earnings (the “notional daily attachable earnings”) by dividing the attachable earnings payable to him by the employer on the pay-day by the number of days in the interval, 
 (b) ascertaining the percentage (or percentages) specified in column 2 of Table C in regulation 5 in relation to the band in column 1 of that Table within which the notional daily attachable earnings calculated under sub-paragraph (a) fall, and 
 (c) calculating the sum which equals the appropriate percentage (or percentages) of the notional daily attachable earnings and multiplying that sum by the number of days in the interval. 
 Commencement Information
 I5 Reg. 9 in force at 27.3.2006, see reg. 1(1) 
 10.   Where P’s earnings are payable as mentioned in regulation 9, and the amount to be paid to P on any pay-day includes an amount advanced in respect of future pay, the amount of P’s notional daily attachable earnings under paragraph (a) of that regulation shall be calculated in accordance with the formula— E+W 
 where: 
 A is the amount of attachable earnings payable to him on that pay-day (exclusive of the amount advanced); 
 B is the amount advanced; 
 C is the number of days in the period for which the amount of attachable earnings is payable; and 
 D is the number of days in the period for which, but for the agreement to pay in advance, the amount advanced would have been payable. 
 Commencement Information
 I6 Reg. 10 in force at 27.3.2006, see reg. 1(1) 
 11.   Regulation 8 applies in relation to regulation 9 as it applies in relation to regulation 6. E+W 
 Commencement Information
 I7 Reg. 11 in force at 27.3.2006, see reg. 1(1) 
 12.   Where earnings are payable to P by the employer by 2 or more series of payments at regular intervals— E+W 
 (a) if some or all of the intervals are of different lengths— 
 (i) for the purpose of arriving at the sum to be deducted, whichever of regulations 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 is appropriate shall apply to the series with the shortest interval (or, if there is more than one series with the shortest interval, such one of those series as the employer may choose), and 
 (ii) in relation to the earnings payable in every other series, the sum to be deducted shall be 20 per cent of the attachable earnings or, where on any pay-day an amount advanced is also paid, 20 per cent of the aggregate of the attachable earnings and the amount advanced; 
 (b) if all of the intervals are of the same length, whichever of regulations 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 is appropriate shall apply to such series as the employer may choose and paragraph (a)(ii) shall apply to every other series, 
 and regulation 8 shall apply in relation to paragraph (a)(ii) as it applies in relation to regulation 6. 
 Commencement Information
 I8 Reg. 12 in force at 27.3.2006, see reg. 1(1) 
 13.   Subject to regulations 14 and 15, where P’s earnings from the employer are payable at irregular intervals, the sums to be deducted on any pay-day shall be arrived at by— E+W 
 (a) calculating what would be his daily attachable earnings by dividing the attachable earnings payable to him by the employer on the pay-day— 
 (i) by the number of days since earnings were last payable by the employer to him, or 
 (ii) if the earnings are the first earnings to be payable by the employer to him with respect to the employment in question, by the number of days since he began the employment; 
 (b) ascertaining the percentage (or percentages) specified in column 2 of Table C in regulation 5 in relation to the band in column 1 of that Table within which the notional attachable earnings calculated under paragraph (a) fall; and 
 (c) calculating the sum which equals the appropriate percentage (or percentages) of the daily attachable earnings and multiplying that sum by the same number as that of the divisor for the purposes of the calculation mentioned in paragraph (a). 
 Commencement Information
 I9 Reg. 13 in force at 27.3.2006, see reg. 1(1) 
 14.   Where on the same pay-day there are payable to P by the employer both earnings payable at regular intervals and earnings payable at irregular intervals, for the purpose of arriving at the sum to be deducted on the pay-day under the foregoing paragraphs all the earnings shall be aggregated and treated as earnings payable at the regular interval. E+W 
 Commencement Information
 I10 Reg. 14 in force at 27.3.2006, see reg. 1(1) 
 15.   Where there are earnings payable to P by the employer at regular intervals on one pay-day, and earnings are payable by the employer to him at irregular intervals on a different pay-day, the sum to be deducted on each of the pay-days on which the earnings which are payable at irregular intervals are so payable shall be 20 per cent of the attachable earnings payable to him on the day. E+W 
 Commencement Information
 I11 Reg. 15 in force at 27.3.2006, see reg. 1(1) 
 Previous:
 Part 
 Next:
 Part 
 Back to top 
 Options/Help
 Print Options
 Print The Whole
 Instrument
 PDF The Whole
 Instrument 
 Web page The Whole
 Instrument 
 Print This
 Part
 only
 PDF This
 Part
 only
 Web page This
 Part
 only
 Legislation is available in different versions:
 Latest Available (revised): The latest available updated version of the legislation incorporating changes made by subsequent legislation and applied by our editorial team. Changes we have not yet applied to the text, can be found in the ‘Changes to Legislation’ area.
 Original (As Enacted or Made): The original version of the legislation as it stood when it was enacted or made. No changes have been applied to the text.
 See additional information alongside the content
 Geographical Extent:
 Indicates the geographical area that this provision applies to. For further information see ‘Frequently Asked Questions’.
 Show Timeline of Changes:
 See how this legislation has or could change over time. Turning this feature on will show extra navigation options to go to these specific points in time. Return to the latest available version by using the controls above in the What Version box.
 Opening Options
 Different options to open legislation in order to view more content on screen at once
 Explanatory Memorandum
 Explanatory Memorandum sets out a brief statement of the purpose of a Statutory Instrument and provides information about its policy objective and policy implications. They aim to make the Statutory Instrument accessible to readers who are not legally qualified and accompany any Statutory Instrument or Draft Statutory Instrument laid before Parliament from June 2004 onwards.
 More Resources
 Access essential accompanying documents and information for this legislation item from this tab. Dependent on the legislation item being viewed this may include:
 the original print PDF of the as enacted version that was used for the print copy
 lists of changes made by and/or affecting this legislation item
 confers power and blanket amendment details
 all formats of all associated documents
 correction slips
 links to related legislation and further information resources
 Timeline of Changes
 This timeline shows the different points in time where a change occurred. The dates will coincide with the earliest date on which the change (e.g an insertion, a repeal or a substitution) that was applied came into force. The first date in the timeline will usually be the earliest date when the provision came into force. In some cases the first date is 01/02/1991 (or for Northern Ireland legislation 01/01/2006). This date is our basedate. No versions before this date are available. For further information see the Editorial Practice Guide and Glossary under Help.
 More Resources
 Use this menu to access essential accompanying documents and information for this legislation item. Dependent on the legislation item being viewed this may include:
 the original print PDF of the as made version that was used for the print copy
 correction slips
 Click 'View More' or select 'More Resources' tab for additional information including:
 lists of changes made by and/or affecting this legislation item
 confers power and blanket amendment details
 all formats of all associated documents
 links to related legislation and further information resources
 The data on this page is available in the alternative data formats listed: HTML5 alternative version 
 HTML snippet alternative version 
 PDF alternative version 
 XML alternative version 
 Akoma Ntoso alternative version 
 HTML RDFa alternative version 
 RDF/XML alternative version 
 New site design 
 Help 
 About us 
 Site map 
 Accessibility 
 Contact us 
 Privacy notice 
 Cookies 
 Fair use policy 
 All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated . This site additionally contains content derived from EUR-Lex, reused under the terms of the Commission Decision 2011/833/EU on the reuse of documents from the EU institutions. For more information see the EUR-Lex public statement on re-use . 
 © Crown and database right 
 