--- p1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock 
Pilot Program in California 
June 17, 2016 
FINAL 
EDMUND G. BROWN JR. 
Governor 
BRIAN P. KELLY, Secretary 
California State Transportation Agency 
JEAN SHIOMOTO 
Director 
© California Department of Motor Vehicles, 2016 
RSS-16-251 

--- p2
 
 
 
 

--- p3
CALIFORNIA STATE TRANSPORTATION AGENCY 
EDMUND G. BROWN JR., Governor 
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR 
DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
P.O. BOX 932328  
SACRAMENTO, CA 94232-3280 
 June 17, 2016 
 
 
 
 
The California Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) is pleased to announce the release of the 
report on the “Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California.”   
This report evaluates the effect of the Assembly Bill 91 (AB 91) pilot program on both driving 
under the influence (DUI) recidivism and crashes among DUI offenders.   
 
AB 91 established a pilot program which required all DUI offenders in four California counties 
(Alameda, Los Angeles, Sacramento, and Tulare) to install an ignition interlock device (IID) on 
their vehicle for a specified period of time in order to obtain a restricted, reissued, and reinstated 
driver license.   
 
DMV’s evaluation of the AB 91 pilot program shows that: 
 Pilot participants had lower DUI recidivism rates than other DUI offenders, but these lower 
rates significantly diminished over time.   
 Individuals obtaining an IID-restricted license had a higher increase in crashes, including 
fatal/injury crashes, compared to DUI offenders whose licenses remained suspended or 
revoked. 
Although the reduction in DUI recidivism provides evidence of benefits associated with IID 
restrictions, the increased crash risks associated with the AB 91 pilot program suggest that 
additional investigation and research could be beneficial. Inclusion of information regarding crash 
responsibility (i.e. at-fault/not-at-fault), alcohol involvement, or severity level (i.e., fatal/injury 
crashes versus property-damage only crashes) may provide further insight.  
 
Future discussions regarding IID requirements should consider the effectiveness of IIDs as a single 
countermeasure or whether combining IIDs with driver license revocation or suspension actions and 
other countermeasures, could provide a more effective approach to enhancing traffic safety.   
 
Based on the findings of this study, the Department recommends the following actions: 
 Convene a task force including representatives from the Legislature, judiciary, law 
enforcement, and other public agencies to develop recommendations for strengthening 
components of California’s comprehensive DUI countermeasure system. 
 
 
California Relay Telephone Service for the deaf or h
 earing impaired from TDD Phones: 1-800-735-2929; from Voice Phones: 1-800-735-2922 
EXEC 601 (REV. 7/2013) DMVWeb 
A Public Service Agency 
 
 

--- p4

--- p5
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recipient’s Name 
Page 2 
June 17, 2016 
 Evaluate the traffic safety benefits of the IID program implemented under Senate Bill 598, 
including the effectiveness of shortening a hard license suspension or revocation period for 
those DUI offenders who choose to obtain an IID-restricted license. 
 Collaborate with representatives from the courts, law enforcement, and other entities to 
explore options for using IIDs as an effective DUI countermeasure, including using IIDs as 
an “alcohol-abstinence-compliance” monitoring tool in a modified version of the traditional 
DUI court model.  
 Conduct and report to the Legislature an evaluation of prior studies on the effectiveness of 
DUI countermeasures in place in California (including IIDs).  This report will offer 
recommendations on legislative reforms to both retain and/or expand effective 
countermeasures and revise and/or strengthen less effective countermeasures. 
It may be beneficial to further evaluate the efficacy of using IIDs in conjunction with other 
countermeasures, including suspension and revocation, to increase public safety. 
Sincerely, 
JEAN SHIOMOTO 
Director 
EXEC 601 (REV. 7/2013) DMVWeb 
Integrity... Trust... Respect... Quality... 

--- p6

--- p7
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 
Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching data sources, gathering and maintaining the 
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for 
reducing this burden to Washington Headquarters Service, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office 
of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188) Washington, DC 20503. 
1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY) 
June 2016 
2. REPORT TYPE 
Final Report 
3. DATES COVERED (From - To) 
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in 
California 
5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 
5b. GRANT NUMBER 
5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 
6. AUTHOR(S) 
Research and Development Branch 
5d. PROJECT NUMBER 
5e. TASK NUMBER 
5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 
California Department of Motor Vehicles 
Research and Development Branch 
P.O. Box 932382 
Sacramento, CA 94232-3820 
8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 
CAL-DMV-RSS-16-251 
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S 
ACRONYM(S) 
11. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 
12. DISTRIBUTION AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 
13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES - email: research@dmv.ca.gov 
14. ABSTRACT 
This study presents an evaluation of the specific deterrence effects of California’s ignition interlock pilot program 
mandated by AB 91 to operate in four California counties — Alameda, Los Angeles, Sacramento, and Tulare — from July 
1, 2010 to January 1, 2016. This study is a follow-up to an earlier legislatively-mandated general deterrence evaluation of 
AB 91’s IID pilot program. The purpose of the present study is to evaluate the specific deterrent capacity of AB 91’s IID 
pilot program, that is, whether it led to reductions in DUI recidivism and crashes among DUI offenders. Results show that, 
while the AB 91 pilot program can be associated with reductions in DUI recidivism among specific DUI offender groups, it 
is also associated with an increase in subsequent crashes among all first DUI offenders in AB 91 pilot counties and among 
all DUI offenders who installed an IID and obtained an AB 91 IID-restricted driver license. Although the reduction in DUI 
recidivism provides evidence of benefits associated with IID restrictions, the increased crash risks associated with the AB 
91 pilot program suggest that additional investigation and research could be beneficial. Inclusion of information regarding 
crash responsibility (i.e. at-fault/not-at-fault), alcohol involvement, or severity level (i.e. fatal/injury crashes vs property-
damage only crashes) may provide further insight. The report recommends to (1) evaluate California's incentive IID 
program mandated under Senate Bill 598, (2) conduct and report to the Legislature a quantitative evaluation of the efficacy 
of current or potential DUI countermeasures (including IIDs) and their combined use, (3) explore the option of using IIDs 
as an “alcohol-abstinence-compliance” monitoring tool, as part of a modified version of the traditional DUI court model, 
and (4) convene a task force to develop recommendations for strengthening components of California's comprehensive 
DUI countermeasure system. 
15. SUBJECT TERMS 
ignition interlock, driving under the influence of alcohol, specific deterrence evaluation, pilot program 
16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 
Unclassified 
17. LIMITATION 
OF ABSTRACT 
None 
18. NUMBER 
OF PAGES 
108 
19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON 
Douglas P. Rickard 
A. REPORT 
Unclassified 
B. ABSTRACT 
Unclassified 
C. THIS PAGE 
Unclassified 
19b. TELEPONE NUMBER (Include area code) 
916-657-5768 

--- p8
 
 
 

--- p9
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
PREFACE 
This report presents the results of a specific deterrent evaluation of an ignition interlock device 
pilot program in California.  This pilot program was mandated by the California Legislature (per 
Assembly Bill 91, chaptered on October 11, 2009 – Feuer).   
i 

--- p10
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
ii 

--- p11
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
iii 

--- p12
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
iv 

--- p13
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Background 
As a result of determined and numerous efforts to combat driving under the influence (DUI) of 
alcohol, substantially fewer people are dying in alcohol-related crashes today than was the case 
30 years ago. One such effort involves the use of ignition interlock devices (IID). These devices 
consist of an alcohol breath-testing unit that is connected to the ignition system of a vehicle. A 
driver must blow into the device and provide a breath sample to start a vehicle. If the breath 
sample indicates that a driver’s blood alcohol concentration (BAC) level is higher than a pre­
specified limit, the vehicle will not start. 
Since their development in the 1960s, IIDs have become an integral part of various DUI 
intervention efforts and programs which require convicted DUI offenders to install an IID in 
their vehicle for a specific time period. 
Early versions of IID programs were mostly 
discretionary and managed by the courts, and over time the administration of these programs in 
the U.S. has been shifting from courts to states’ driver licensing agencies, while some states have 
established a “hybrid approach” that combines components of both systems (United States 
Government Accountability Office, 2014). Currently, all states in the U.S. have laws authorizing 
use of IID devices to prevent impaired driving. 
According to prior research evaluations of IID programs in the U.S. and internationally, IIDs are 
effective in reducing DUI recidivism rates as long as the IID is installed in the offender’s 
vehicle. However, after the IID has been removed, this effect fades away, and recidivism rates 
tend to increase and to become equivalent to the levels of offenders who did not install an IID 
(Elder et al., 2011). 
IIDs have been in use in California since the early 1990s when legislation was passed to 
authorize judges to order repeat DUI offenders to install IIDs in their vehicles (Fulkerson, 2003). 
Since then, several additional laws pertaining to IIDs have been enacted, with some requiring an 
evaluation of the effectiveness of IIDs mandated under a particular piece of legislation. A major 
evaluation study of California’s IID program was conducted in 2005 that involved IID use 
among different groups of offenders. Overall, the study’s results were mixed and revealed that 
IIDs can reduce subsequent DUI recidivism, but only in specific contexts and among specific 
groups of offenders. The results also showed that IIDs can be associated with a significant 
v 

--- p14
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
increase in crash risk among offenders who installed an IID, which suggest, in essence, doubtful 
traffic safety benefits of IID devices (DeYoung, Tashima, & Masten, 2005). 
On July 1, 2010, Assembly Bill (AB) 91 was implemented that added California Vehicle Code 
(CVC) Section 23700, establishing a pilot program in Alameda, Los Angeles, Sacramento, and 
Tulare Counties, from July 1, 2010 to January 1, 2016. This pilot program required all offenders 
convicted of first-time or repeat DUI offense (CVC 23152 and 23153) to install an IID on all 
vehicles they own or operate for a specified period of time in order to obtain a restricted, 
reissued, or reinstated driver’s license. The required time period for the IID installation is based 
on the number of prior DUI convictions, and ranges from 5 months for first-time DUI offense to 
48 months for a fourth or any subsequent DUI violation. 
The AB 91 law required the DMV to report to the Legislature on the effectiveness of this pilot 
program and to determine whether the pilot program was associated with a reduction in first-time 
DUI violations and repeat DUI offenses of CVC Sections 23152 and 23153 in the pilot counties. 
As a result of this mandate, the general deterrent evaluation of the IID pilot program study was 
completed (Chapman, Oulad Daoud, & Masten, 2015). 
That study examined the IID installation rates of convicted DUI offenders per their violation 
month, for each DUI offender level, separately for each pilot county, and for all non-pilot 
counties combined. Further, to evaluate the association of the IID pilot program with reductions 
in DUI offenses in the pilot counties, monthly rates of DUI convictions (combined with rates of 
alcohol- or drug-reckless convictions for some analyses) per 100,000 licensed drivers age 16 or 
older were calculated for each pilot county and for all non-pilot counties combined. The study 
used Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) interrupted time series analyses as 
the analytical technique to compare the rates of DUI convictions before and after the IID pilot 
program implementation, adjusted for changes observed in the non-pilot counties and for other 
factors that may bias the rates comparison. 
According to the study results, IID installation rates increased considerably during the pilot 
period in the pilot counties. Of all DUI offenders from all pilot counties combined, 42.4% 
installed an IID during the pilot period, compared to 2.1% during the pre-pilot period. IID 
installation rates among all DUI offenders in non-pilot counties increased modestly from 2.5% to 
4.3% during the same time period. IID installation rates were highest among first DUI offenders 
(46.7%), followed by lower rates among second (33.2%) and third-or-more (15.7%) DUI 
offenders. 
vi 

--- p15
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
The results of the ARIMA time series analyses indicated that, after adjustments for changes 
observed in the non-pilot counties and other covariates, the license-based rates of DUI 
convictions among first, second, and third-or-more DUI offenders in the pilot counties during the 
pilot program were not significantly different from the rates of the same DUI offender groups 
during the pre-pilot period. Therefore, the main conclusion from this evaluation was that the AB 
91 pilot program does not appear to be associated with a reduction in the number of first-time or 
repeat DUI convictions in the pilot counties. 
This evaluation did not provide information about the specific deterrence effects of the AB 91 
pilot program. Specifically, the study did not investigate whether the pilot program is associated 
with changes in the specific behavior of individual drivers who were convicted of DUI during 
the pilot program implementation period in one of the pilot counties and thus were subject to the 
IID pilot program requirements. Therefore, a recommendation was made to conduct a follow-up 
study to determine if the AB 91 pilot program has any specific deterrent effects. 
Current Study 
This study presents a specific deterrence evaluation of the AB 91 IID pilot program. The 
purpose of the study is to provide empirical evidence that may be used by policy-makers (and 
others) to consider the potential consequences—both intended and unintended—of broader 
expansion of the AB 91 IID program. To properly conduct such an evaluation, it is necessary to 
examine not just the intended (or presumed intended) outcomes of the program, but also certain 
unintended (or presumed unintended) outcomes. Toward that end, this study was designed to 
determine if the AB 91 pilot program, as it was implemented, is associated with differences in 
DUI recidivism and crashes between DUI offenders in the pilot counties who were subject to and 
complied with the IID pilot program requirements and those who were not subject to the pilot 
program.  To accomplish this objective, two types of evaluations were conducted. 
AB 91 Intent-To-Treat Evaluation 
The AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation was conducted separately for each of three DUI offender 
groups (first, second, and third and subsequent) by the way of comparing subsequent DUI 
recidivism and crash involvement of DUI offenders in the AB 91 pilot counties with the same 
type of offenders in non-pilot counties. These types of evaluations are characterized as “intent to 
treat” evaluations because they include all DUI offenders who were subject to the AB 91 law 
vii 

--- p16
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
regardless of whether or not they obtained an IID-restricted driver license and so complied with 
the law. 
AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation 
As with the previous type of evaluation approach, the AB 91 IID/restricted license evaluation 
was completed separately for first, second, and third and subsequent DUI offenders. This 
evaluation involved a comparison of subsequent DUI recidivism and crash involvement of DUI 
offenders from the AB 91 pilot counties who complied with all pilot program requirements and 
obtained an IID-restricted license with an eligible comparison group of similar DUI offenders 
who did not obtain an IID-restricted license. That is, the comparison group consisted of 
offenders who were suspended or revoked during the study time period. 
Method 
Data on all drivers convicted of a DUI offense (CVC 23152) with violation dates from July 1, 
2010 through June 30, 2013 were obtained from abstracts of conviction, which are reported to 
the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) by all California courts and stored on the 
Department’s Driver Record Master (DRM) database. Data were extracted in January 2015 to 
allow enough follow-up time to conduct the outcome analyses for the three DUI offender groups 
(defined in detail in the following paragraph).  
For all DUI offenders selected for the study, DUI offender level was used to differentiate 
between first, second, and third and subsequent DUI offenders. Separate outcome analyses were 
conducted for each DUI offender group due to considerable differences in their respective post-
conviction licensing sanctions and associated AB 91 pilot program requirements to obtain an 
IID-restricted license and/or to reinstate a driving privilege. Likewise, the follow-up period for 
each DUI offender group varied from 12 months for the first DUI offender group, 30 months for 
the second DUI offender group, and 42 months for the third and subsequent DUI offender group. 
It is assumed that a primary intended outcome of the AB 91 pilot program is a reduction in 
subsequent DUI recidivism. DUI recidivism can be measured in a relatively “pure” way by 
looking at subsequent DUI convictions (i.e., 2nd, 3rd, etc. offenses). There also exist closely-
related phenomena that should be taken into account when attempting to measure alcohol-
involved driving. For that reason, the analyses include a separate measure of subsequent DUI-
related incidents that in addition to DUI convictions may also include pre-conviction 
viii 

--- p17
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
administrative per se (APS) suspensions, alcohol- or drug-involved crashes, and DUI Failure-to-
Appear violations. 
It is also possible for laws to have unintended effects. It may not always be possible to delineate 
the precise mechanisms that lead to these unintended effects. Nevertheless, it is presumed that 
any judgment as to the ultimate traffic safety value of a proposed program must take into 
account, when possible, unintended effects. To do otherwise would be to leave unexamined 
certain critical information about the overall impact of a program on the safety of the users of 
California’s roads. Any proposed change to DUI sanctions may have an associated effect on 
crashes—even where that associated effect was unintended. Because alcohol and drug 
impairment plays an important role in a substantial proportion of fatal/injury crashes in 
California, it is therefore vital to understand, to the extent possible, both the intended and 
unintended effects that proposed changes to DUI sanctions may have on crash outcomes. 
As stated above, two evaluations for each DUI offender group were conducted; (1) an overall 
AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation and (2) an AB 91 IID/restricted license evaluation.  
For the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation, all AB 91 eligible drivers convicted of a first, second, or 
third and subsequent DUI offense in the four pilot counties during the pilot program 
implementation period, regardless of whether they complied with the program requirements, 
were included in this evaluation.  Comparison drivers consisted of those who were convicted of a 
first, second, or third and subsequent DUI offense in one of the non-pilot counties during the 
AB 91 pilot program implementation period.  
For the AB 91 IID/restricted license evaluation, all drivers with a qualifying DUI offense in one 
of the AB 91 pilot counties who installed an IID and satisfied other requirements to receive an 
AB 91 IID-restricted license were identified for this evaluation. Comparison group drivers 
consisted of those convicted of the same offense (CVC 23152), who remained suspended or 
revoked following their qualifying DUI conviction and, therefore, did not receive a restricted 
driver license. 
Post-conviction odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction, DUI incident, and crash were 
compared between treatment and comparison groups for both evaluations. Statistical controls 
were employed at two levels to attenuate as much potential preexisting group bias as possible.  
The first was to match comparison drivers with treated AB 91 drivers on selected variables 
ix 

--- p18
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
through the use of propensity scores. The second was to remove as much remaining bias as 
possible during the analyses by using covariates in the final statistical models.  
For both evaluations and for each DUI offender group, statistical models were developed 
separately for three outcome (criterion) measures: (1) days to first subsequent DUI conviction, 
(2) days to first subsequent DUI incident (i.e., APS suspension, alcohol- or drug-involved crash, 
DUI conviction, or DUI Failure-to-Appear violation), and (3) days to first subsequent crash (i.e., 
any traffic crash – property damage and/or injury/fatal reported to the Department by law 
enforcement or involved drivers).  
Cox regression survival analysis was used to analyze all outcome measures. The hazard ratio, 
interpreted as a ratio comparing the odds of an outcome in one group to the odds of the outcome 
in a comparison group over the time period of the study, was used to describe the relationship 
between the outcome measure and the treatment effect (the AB 91 intent-to-treat, or the AB 91 
IID/restricted license, as the case may be) in the current study. 
x 

--- p19
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Results 
AB 91 Intent-To-Treat Evaluation 
FIRST DUI OFFENDERS 
 The AB 91 program is not associated with an increase or decrease in the odds or hazards 
of a subsequent DUI conviction over the 12-month time period. 
 The AB 91 program is not associated with a reduction or increase in the odds or hazards 
of a subsequent DUI incident over the 12-month time period. 
 First offenders in non-pilot counties have a 6.1% lower hazards or odds of a subsequent 
crash relative to those in the pilot counties over the 12-month time period. 
SECOND DUI OFFENDERS 
 Second offenders in non-pilot counties have a 10.8% lower hazard or odds of a 
subsequent DUI conviction relative to those in the pilot counties over the 30-month time 
period. 
 Second offenders in non-pilot counties have a 16.2% lower hazard or odds of a 
subsequent DUI incident relative to those in the pilot counties over the 30-month time 
period. 
 The AB 91 program is not associated with a reduction or increase in the odds or hazards 
of a subsequent crash over the 30-month time period. 
THIRD AND SUBSEQUENT DUI OFFENDERS 
 The AB 91 program is not associated with an increase or decrease in the odds or hazards 
of a subsequent DUI conviction over the 42-month time period. 
 The AB 91 program is associated with a 16.7% lower hazard or odds of a subsequent 
DUI incident among the offenders in non-pilot counties relative to those in the pilot 
counties over the 42-month time period. 
xi 

--- p20
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
 The AB 91 program is not associated with a reduction or increase in the odds or hazards 
of a subsequent crash over the 42-month time period. 
AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation 
FIRST DUI OFFENDERS 
 The AB 91 IID/restricted license group is associated with a 73% lower odds or hazards of 
a subsequent DUI conviction over the first 182 days following their original DUI 
conviction relative to the comparison group of suspended drivers. During days 183 to 
365, the AB 91 IID/restricted license group is associated with a 43% lower odds or 
hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction relative to the comparison group. Therefore, the 
AB 91 IID/restricted license treatment group has a lower odds or hazards of subsequent 
DUI convictions; however, this trend tends to diminish over the 12-month study period.  
 The AB 91 IID/restricted license group is associated with a 74% lower odds or hazards of 
a subsequent DUI incident over the first 182 days following their original DUI conviction 
relative to the comparison group of suspended drivers. During days 183 to 365, the AB 
91 IID/restricted license group is associated with a 45% lower odds or hazards of a 
subsequent DUI incident relative to the comparison group. 
Therefore, the AB 91 
IID/restricted license treatment group has a lower odds or hazards of subsequent DUI 
incidents; however, this trend tends to diminish over the 12-month study period.  
 The AB 91 IID/restricted license and the comparison groups do not significantly differ in 
their odds or hazards for a subsequent crash during the first 99 days following their 
original DUI conviction. During days 100 to 199, the AB 91 IID/restricted license group 
is associated with the odds or hazards of a subsequent crash that is approximately 1.57 
times greater (56.8% higher) than the comparison group of suspended drivers. During 
days 200 to 365, the AB 91 IID/restricted license group is associated with the odds or 
hazards of a subsequent crash that is approximately 1.98 times greater (97.5% higher) 
than the comparison group. Therefore, the AB 91 IID/restricted license treatment group 
has a higher odds or hazards of subsequent crashes, and this trend increases over the 12­
month study period. 
xii 

--- p21
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
SECOND DUI OFFENDERS 
 The AB 91 IID/restricted license group is associated with a 67% lower odds or hazards of 
a subsequent DUI conviction over the first 364 days following their original DUI 
conviction relative to the comparison group of suspended drivers. During days 365 to 
730, the AB 91 IID/restricted license group is associated with a 60% lower odds or 
hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction relative to the comparison group. During days 
731 and subsequent following their conviction for a second DUI offense, the hazard ratio 
between the AB 91 IID/restricted license group and the comparison group is not 
statistically significant. Therefore, the AB 91 IID/restricted license treatment group has a 
lower odds or hazards of subsequent DUI convictions. This trend diminishes over time, 
and after 730 days following the conviction of a second DUI offense, the difference 
between the treatment and comparison groups is no longer statistically significant. 
 The AB 91 IID/restricted license group is associated with a 70% lower odds or hazards of 
a subsequent DUI incident over the first 364 days following their original DUI conviction 
relative to the comparison group of suspended drivers. During days 365 to 730, the 
AB 91 IID/restricted license group is associated with a 58% lower odds or hazards of a 
subsequent DUI incident relative to the comparison group. 
During days 731 and 
subsequent following their conviction for a second DUI offense, the hazard ratio between 
the AB 91 IID/restricted license group and the comparison group is not statistically 
significant. Therefore, the AB 91 IID/restricted license treatment group has a lower odds 
or hazards of subsequent DUI incidents. This trend diminishes over time, and after 730 
days following the conviction of a second DUI offense, the difference between the 
treatment and comparison groups is no longer statistically significant. 
 The AB 91 IID/restricted license and the comparison groups do not significantly differ in 
their odds or hazards for a subsequent crash during the first 299 days following their 
original DUI conviction. During days 300 to 730, the AB 91 IID/restricted license group 
is associated with the odds or hazards of a subsequent crash that is approximately 1.58 
times greater (58% higher) than the comparison group of suspended drivers. During days 
731 and subsequent, the AB 91 IID/restricted license group is associated with the odds or 
hazards of a crash that is approximately 2.16 times greater (116% higher) than the 
comparison group. Therefore, the AB 91 IID/restricted license treatment group has a 
higher odds or hazards of a subsequent crash, and this trend increases over the 30-month 
study period. 
xiii 

--- p22
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
THIRD AND SUBSEQUENT DUI OFFENDERS 
 The comparison group of revoked subjects has an odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI 
conviction that is approximately 3.4 times higher than that associated with the AB 91 
IID/restricted license group. Therefore, the AB 91 IID/restricted license treatment group 
has a lower odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction over the 42-month time 
period. 
 The comparison group of revoked subjects has an odds or hazards of subsequent DUI 
incident that is approximately 3.4 times higher than that associated with the AB 91 
IID/restricted license group. Therefore, the AB 91 IID/restricted license treatment group 
has a lower odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI incident over the 42-month time period. 
 The comparison group of revoked subjects has an odds or hazards of subsequent crashes 
that is approximately 33% less than of the AB 91 IID/restricted license group. Therefore, 
the AB 91 IID/restricted license treatment group has a higher odds or hazards of a 
subsequent crash over the 42-month time period. 
Conclusions 
The findings of the specific deterrence evaluation of the AB 91 pilot program indicated that there 
were either no differences in subsequent DUI recidivism and crash involvement of DUI 
offenders in the AB 91 pilot counties relative to those in the non-pilot counties or that some 
groups of DUI offenders from non-pilot counties have lower risk of a subsequent DUI recidivism 
and crash involvement relative to those in the pilot counties. Further, the findings of the current 
study show that IIDs can be associated with reduced subsequent DUI recidivism among specific 
DUI offender groups, but with a substantial increase in subsequent crashes among DUI offenders 
who installed an IID relative to suspended or revoked DUI offenders. It bears emphasizing that 
the current study found a strong and reliable association between possession of an AB 91 IID-
restricted license and reduced DUI recidivism. Across all DUI offender levels, those with an IID-
restricted license have lower odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction, and lower odds or 
hazards of a subsequent DUI incident when compared to drivers with suspended or revoked 
licenses. For first DUI offenders these differences tend to diminish with time. For second 
offenders these differences disappear after approximately 2 years. For third DUI offenders the 
difference in subsequent DUI recidivism did not diminish over the 42-month follow-up period. 
xiv 

--- p23
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
These study findings are generally consistent with those reported by DeYoung et al. (2005) and 
with other prior Departmental research showing driver license suspensions and revocations to be 
the most effective available countermeasure in reducing crash involvement (Gebers, 2009; 
Hagen, 1977; Rogers, 1995, 1997; Tashima & Marelich, 1989; Tashima & Peck, 1986).   
The positive associations between AB 91 IID-restricted license and lower DUI recidivism among 
all DUI offender groups and its diminishing effects over time for some DUI offenders found in 
the current study are consistent with overall findings from other research studies. Specifically, 
other studies have also found that first and repeat DUI offenders with IIDs installed in their 
vehicles have substantially lower DUI recidivism rates than their corresponding DUI offender 
groups whose driver licenses are suspended. Similar to the current study findings, this positive 
effect diminishes once IIDs are removed from the offenders’ vehicles (Elder et al., 2011; Roth, 
Voas, & Marques, 2007). 
The study findings indicate a negative association between having an IID-restricted license and 
subsequent crash involvement for all DUI offender groups. For the first and second DUI 
offenders, higher crash risk among those with the AB 91 IID-restricted license increases over 
time relative to DUI offenders with a suspended license. Therefore, although the AB 91 IID 
program is associated with a significant reduction in DUI recidivism among all DUI offender 
groups, the program is also associated with an increase in crash involvement among all DUI 
offenders that are subject to the program. This is particularly problematic since a substantial 
proportion of these crashes are those involving injuries and/or fatalities (of the overall crash 
involvement measured in the study, the proportion of fatal/injury crashes ranged from mid-30% 
to low-40% for different DUI offender groups—which is consistent with what prior California 
evaluations have reported for these offender groups). 
The crash outcome findings of the current study are of primary importance since traffic crashes 
and costs associated with the resulting injuries, fatalities, and property damage are a direct and 
quantifiable measure of the traffic safety effects of a given program. Consequently, given that 
the AB 91 pilot program as implemented is associated with an increase in crash risk among DUI 
offenders who complied with AB 91 program requirements and obtained an IID-restricted 
license when compared to drivers with a suspended or revoked license, the traffic safety benefits 
of this program are potentially marginalized by the greater safety toll of an increased propensity 
for traffic crash involvement. 
xv 

--- p24
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
The analytical approach taken in this study rests in part on a basic assumption that the state's 
interest in reducing the number of DUI incidents ultimately derives from the demonstrated fact 
that impaired driving is intimately tied to a huge toll in economic costs and human suffering. In 
short, any hoped-for reduction in the number of DUI incidents is assumed to be a means to an 
end—the preservation of life and health among the users of our roads—and never exactly an end 
in itself. Similarly, any hoped-for reduction in DUI recidivism is assumed to be a means to 
reduce the public-health threat impaired drivers pose to themselves and others in terms of traffic 
crash involvement. 
Due to the quasi-experimental nature of this evaluation that was necessitated for this evaluation 
of the AB 91 IID pilot program, it cannot be scientifically predicted what the expected reduction 
in DUI recidivism (2nd, 3rd, etc., DUI convictions and DUI incidents) would be more broadly 
implemented. That number is certainly greater than zero, and could be in the thousands. By the 
same token, it also cannot be precisely predicted what the expected increase in crashes, including 
fatal/injury crashes, would be were this AB 91 IID pilot program to be with a broader 
implementation.  That number is certainly greater than zero, and could be in the hundreds.  
Consistent with the recommendations from DeYoung et al. (2005), the IID requirement should 
continue to be evaluated as a potential DUI countermeasure in California. For example, driver 
license suspension or revocation actions could be combined with IID requirements, as these two 
countermeasures may help reduce alcohol-related incidents in different ways. The effectiveness 
of driver license suspension has been documented in numerous prior California studies since the 
late 1970s both as an overall traffic safety countermeasure and as, most relevant in this context, a 
DUI countermeasure (Hagen, 1977; Tashima & Peck, 1986; Tashima & Marelich, 1989; Rogers, 
1995, 1997; Gebers, 2009). 
The importance of sustained use of hard license suspension or revocation actions as a DUI 
countermeasure is particularly relevant in regards to APS suspension or revocation actions. 
Namely, prior research has shown that APS license suspensions or revocations have statistically 
significant and substantially important effects in reducing alcohol-related fatal crash involvement 
(Wagenaar & Maldonado-Molina , 2007; Rogers, 1995, 1997). In her two studies, Rogers has 
shown that California's APS law from 1990 have both general (1995) and specific (1997) 
deterrent effects. 
Specifically, because of their swiftness and certainty of punishment 
(immediately upon DUI arrest), APS suspension and revocation actions are very well in sync 
with the main deterrence theory postulates (Ross, 1982) and continued requirement for hard 
xvi 

--- p25
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
license suspension or revocation for a pre-specified minimum time period, as prescribed under 
California's APS law, should be preserved. 
Overall, driver license actions should continue to be an integral part of the DUI countermeasure 
system in California. As Helander (2002) noted in the past legislatively-mandated review of 
scientific evidence on effective DUI countermeasures, driver license suspensions are among the 
most proven-effective DUI countermeasures whose integrity should be maintained. He further 
argued that new DUI laws and programs should “not diminish or work at cross-purposes to laws 
and programs that are effective . . .” (p. 27) as are license suspension/revocation actions. 
DeYoung (2013) also reasoned that, in addition to being effective traffic safety countermeasures, 
driver license suspension and revocation actions are inexpensive and relatively easy to 
administer. 
One promising solution that addresses a need to preserve the use of suspensions and revocations 
and combines it with ignition interlock is the IID program legislated under SB 598 (Statutes of 
2009, Chapter 193, Huff – see Appendix E). This law offers an incentive for alcohol-only second 
and third misdemeanor DUI offenders to shorten their required suspension/revocation period 
provided they install an IID. Consequently, SB 598 offers potentially optimal use of both 
licensing actions and IID countermeasures, and, therefore, the effectiveness of this particular law 
should be evaluated. In addition, SB 598 potentially addresses obvious shortcomings of AB 91 
and other existing IID programs in the state. Specifically, the IID program under SB 598 law 
“recognizes” that IIDs prevent drivers from driving under the influence of alcohol and have no 
value in preventing them from driving under the influence of drugs. Although SB 598 law 
shortens required suspension or revocation period for eligible DUI offenders, it does not 
completely eliminate licensing actions. Thus, instead of being completely eliminated, driver 
license suspension or revocation actions could be combined with IID requirements as these two 
measures may help reduce alcohol-related incidents in different ways. However, before these two 
countermeasures are combined, it needs to be determined what are the most appropriate or 
optimal periods of hard license suspension or revocation that different types of DUI offenders 
need to serve prior to obtaining an IID-restricted license. As DeYoung (2013) emphasized, 
shortening license suspension too drastically might result in eliminating significant general 
deterrent effect of license suspension, a move which compromises overall traffic safety. 
DUI offenders in California are currently subject to a combination of various sanctions, 
penalties, and interventions relative to their DUI offender status and aimed at preventing them 
from future impaired driving and crash-involved episodes. The effectiveness of each of these 
xvii 

--- p26
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
sanctions and penalties varies depending on different circumstances such as whether they are 
implemented alone or in combination with others. There is a tendency over time to add new 
requirements or introduce new programs that DUI offenders must comply with in order to 
relicense. However, as DeYoung argued in his recent paper (2013), continuing to add new 
requirements may result in discouraging DUI offenders altogether from complying with all 
conditions to reinstate their driving privilege and indirectly forcing them out of reach of the post-
licensing control system. Therefore, before a new requirement is added to the already 
complicated set of DUI countermeasures in California, any such new requirements must 
demonstrate “convincing traffic safety benefits” (DeYoung, 2013). 
Recommendations 
The results of the analyses presented in this report clearly show that the IID-restricted license 
program, as implemented in the 4-county pilot authorized under AB 91, has mixed traffic safety 
impacts. There is strong evidence of a reduction in DUI recidivism, across all offender levels, 
among those obtaining an IID-restricted license under the provisions of this law. However, there 
is also strong evidence of a consistent increase in crashes, including fatal/injury crashes, among 
these same drivers. The state has a compelling interest in reducing the toll of motor vehicle-
related injuries and fatalities. This interest is expressed in the state’s commitment to the 
Strategic Highway Safety Plan and is in keeping with associated federal laws and regulations, 
such as MAP-21 (“Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century,” P.L. 112-141). Although 
the reduction in DUI recidivism provides evidence of benefits associated with IID restrictions, 
the increased crash risks associated with the AB 91 pilot program suggest that additional 
investigation and research could be beneficial. Inclusion of information regarding crash 
responsibility (i.e. at-fault/not-at-fault), alcohol involvement, or severity level (i.e. fatal/injury 
crashes vs property-damage only crashes) may provide further insight. 
The following 
recommendations are therefore offered based on the findings of this study. 
1. The Department should implement its planned evaluation of SB 598. An evaluation of 
the traffic safety benefits of the IID program legislated under this law is important 
because it will determine how effective is the shortening of the proven-effective 
countermeasure of a hard license suspension or revocation period among qualifying DUI 
offenders when offered the option of an IID-restricted license. If found effective, SB 598 
could be adopted and/or incorporated into a new comprehensive IID program for drivers 
convicted of alcohol-related DUI offenses. 
xviii 

--- p27
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
2. The Department should conduct and report to the Legislature a quantitative evaluation of 
prior California studies focusing on the efficacy of DUI countermeasures already in place 
in California. This report would offer recommendations for legislative reform as to 
which existing countermeasures are more effective and should be retained and/or 
expanded and which countermeasures are currently less effective and therefore should be 
revised and strengthened. Such an effort would involve the application of a meta-
analytical technique focusing on potential topical areas such as (1) driver-based 
countermeasures (e.g., minimum drinking-age laws, admin per se laws, lower per se BAC 
for 
repeat 
offenders, 
public 
information 
and 
education); 
(2) 
vehicle-based 
countermeasures (e.g., IID, vehicle impoundment); and (3) other countermeasures that 
have an impact on alcohol-impaired driving (e.g., DUI Court and alcohol beverage 
control). The results will assist lawmakers and traffic safety administrators in proposing 
and implementing DUI countermeasures that are potentially effective and, therefore, 
reduce the risk of unintended consequences such as increased crash risk.  
3. The Department should work with representatives from the courts, law enforcement, and 
other involved entities, through the Strategic Highway Safety Plan (SHSP) process or 
otherwise, to explore options for the use of IIDs as a potentially effective DUI 
countermeasure. Specifically, there are some recent attempts in California (such as in 
San Joaquin County) that include using IIDs as an “alcohol-abstinence-compliance” 
monitoring tool, as part of a modified version of the traditional DUI court model. In 
addition to IID use, this DUI court model encompasses the use of an alcohol detection 
ankle bracelet for two different levels of court supervision and treatment monitoring of 
convicted repeat DUI offenders. This approach offers potentially promising results; 
further investment and exploration of this or similar efforts may result in empirical 
evidence to support the effective use of IIDs as a DUI and traffic safety countermeasure. 
4. The Department should convene a task force, including representatives from the 
judiciary, law enforcement, and other public or private agencies whose work includes 
oversight, administration, or enforcement of various aspects of the DUI countermeasure 
system. The purpose of this task force would be to develop recommendations for further 
actions (including potential model legislation), for strengthening components of 
California's comprehensive DUI countermeasure system (e.g., IIDs, suspension and 
revocation actions, DUI courts, vehicle impoundment, DUI treatment program, etc.).  
These recommendations for further actions may be based on the information gathered as 
xix 

--- p28
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
part of recommendations #1, #2, and #3 (above), and other research findings or policy 
considerations where appropriate. 
xx 

--- p29
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PAGE 
PREFACE........................................................................................................................................ i 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ............................................................................................................. iii 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................ v 
INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................... 1 
Recent Trends in Use and Evaluations of IID Programs......................................................... 1 
History of IID Programs in California..................................................................................... 4 
The AB 91 IID Pilot Program.................................................................................................. 7 
Evaluation Objective ............................................................................................................... 9 
AB 91 Intent-To-Treat Evaluation ................................................................................. 10 
AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation...................................................................... 11 
METHOD ..................................................................................................................................... 13 
Subject Selection ................................................................................................................... 13 
Study Enhancements.............................................................................................................. 15 
Study Evaluations .................................................................................................................. 16 
Research Design .................................................................................................................... 18 
Analysis ................................................................................................................................. 21 
RESULTS ..................................................................................................................................... 25 
AB 91 Intent-To-Treat Evaluation......................................................................................... 25 
First DUI Offenders........................................................................................................ 26 
Second DUI Offenders ................................................................................................... 31 
Third and Subsequent DUI Offenders............................................................................ 36 
Days to first subsequent DUI incident............................................................................ 38 
AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation ............................................................................. 42 
First DUI Offenders........................................................................................................ 42 
Second DUI Offenders ................................................................................................... 50 
Third and Subsequent DUI Offenders............................................................................ 58 
DISCUSSION............................................................................................................................... 63 
Study Limitations................................................................................................................... 63 
Summary of Findings ............................................................................................................ 64 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................................. 67 
Recommendations.................................................................................................................. 73 
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................. 77 
xxi 

--- p30
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 
APPENDICES .............................................................................................................................. 81 
APPENDIX A Assembly Bill No. 91, CHAPTER 217 ................................................................ 82 
APPENDIX B Order of Installment of an Ignition Interlock Device ........................................... 89 
APPENDIX C Table C1 ............................................................................................................... 90 
APPENDIX D Variables Assessed for Propensity Score Matching Equations ............................ 91 
APPENDIX E  Senate Bill No. 598, CHAPTER 193................................................................... 92 
 
LIST OF TABLES  
 
NUMBER 
PAGE 
1 Mean Propensity Scores and Sample Sizes for Study Groups ................................................ 21 
2 First DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-To-Treat Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, Days 
to First Subsequent DUI Conviction ..................................................................................... 26 
3 First DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-To-Treat Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, Days 
to First Subsequent DUI Incident ......................................................................................... 28 
4 First DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-To-Treat Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, Days 
to First Subsequent Crash ..................................................................................................... 30 
5 Second DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-To-Treat Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent DUI Conviction ............................................................................ 32 
6 Second DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-To-Treat Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent DUI Incident ................................................................................ 34 
7 Second DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-To-Treat Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent Crash ............................................................................................ 35 
8 Third and Subsequent DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-To-Treat Evaluation, Cox 
Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent DUI Conviction ............................................ 37 
9 Third and Subsequent DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-To-Treat Evaluation, Cox 
Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent DUI Incident ................................................. 39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued) 
xxii 

--- p31
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued) 
LIST OF TABLES (continued) 
NUMBER 
PAGE 
10 Third and Subsequent DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-To-Treat Evaluation, Cox 
Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent Crash............................................................. 41 
11 First DUI Offender AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent DUI Conviction............................................................................ 43 
12 First DUI Offender AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation, Time Intervals and 
Hazard Ratios for the Extended Cox Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent 
DUI Conviction..................................................................................................................... 45 
13 First DUI Offender AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent DUI Incident ................................................................................ 46 
14 First DUI Offender AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation, Time Intervals and 
Hazard Ratios for the Extended Cox Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent 
DUI Incident ......................................................................................................................... 47 
15 First DUI Offender AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent Crash ............................................................................................ 48 
16 First DUI Offender AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation, Time Intervals and 
Hazard Ratios for the Extended Cox Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent 
Crash ..................................................................................................................................... 49 
17 Second DUI Offender AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox Regression 
Model, Days to First Subsequent DUI Conviction ............................................................... 51 
18 Second DUI Offender AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation, Time Intervals and 
Hazard Ratios for the Extended Cox Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent 
DUI Conviction..................................................................................................................... 52 
19 Second DUI Offender AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox Regression 
Model, Days to First Subsequent DUI Incident.................................................................... 54 
xxiii 

--- p32
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued) 
LIST OF TABLES (continued) 
NUMBER 
PAGE 
20 Second DUI Offender AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation, Time Intervals and 
Hazard Ratios for the Extended Cox Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent 
DUI Incident ......................................................................................................................... 54 
21 Second DUI Offender AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox Regression 
Model, Days to First Subsequent Crash................................................................................ 56 
22 Second DUI Offender AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation, Time Intervals and 
Hazard Ratios for the Extended Cox Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent 
Crash ..................................................................................................................................... 57 
23 Third and Subsequent DUI Offender AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox 
Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent DUI Conviction ............................................ 58 
24 Third and Subsequent DUI Offender AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox 
25 Third and Subsequent DUI Offender AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox 
Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent DUI Incident ................................................. 60 
Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent Crash............................................................. 61 
26 Summary of Study Findings ................................................................................................... 65 
LIST OF FIGURES 
1 Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent DUI conviction for first 
DUI offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to-treat 
evaluation.............................................................................................................................. 27 
2 Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent DUI incident for first DUI 
offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation.......... 29 
3 Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent crash for first DUI 
offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation.......... 31 
xxiv 

--- p33
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued) 
LIST OF FIGURES (continued) 
NUMBER 
PAGE 
4 Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent DUI conviction for second 
DUI offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to-treat 
evaluation.............................................................................................................................. 33 
5 Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent DUI incident for second 
DUI offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to-treat 
evaluation.............................................................................................................................. 34 
6 Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent crash for second DUI 
offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation.......... 36 
7 Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent DUI conviction for third 
and subsequent DUI offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 
intent-to-treat evaluation....................................................................................................... 38 
8 Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent DUI incident for third and 
subsequent DUI offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to­
treat evaluation...................................................................................................................... 40 
9 Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent crash for third and 
subsequent DUI offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to­
treat evaluation...................................................................................................................... 41 
10 Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent DUI conviction for third 
and subsequent DUI offenders in the treatment vs. comparison groups for the AB 91 
IID/restricted license evaluation ........................................................................................... 59 
11 Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent DUI incident for third and 
subsequent DUI offenders in the treatment vs. comparison groups for the AB 91 
IID/restricted license evaluation ........................................................................................... 60 
xxv 

--- p34
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
12 Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent crash for third and 
subsequent DUI offenders in the treatment vs. comparison groups for the AB 91 
IID/restricted license evaluation ........................................................................................... 62 
xxvi 

--- p35
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
INTRODUCTION 
As a result of determined and numerous efforts to combat driving under the influence of alcohol, 
substantially fewer people are dying in alcohol-related crashes today than was the case 30 years 
ago. Regardless, lives continue to be lost every year in crashes where alcohol was involved and 
the “battle” with this traffic safety problem is far from done. According to the most recent 
information available, after 4 consecutive years of decline, the number of people dying in 
alcohol-involved crashes in California is again on the rise in the past 3 years with 1,197 lives lost 
in 2013. In addition, the percentage of alcohol-involved crash fatalities (of the total number of 
crash fatalities) in California averaged approximately 39% in the last 8 years, which is an 
increase from the value of 31% reported 15 years ago (Oulad Daoud, Tashima, & Grippe, 2015; 
Tashima & Helander, 2005). 
Ignition interlock devices (IID) have been widely used in an attempt to prevent driving under the 
influence (DUI) of alcohol since their development in the 1960s. These devices consist of an 
alcohol breath-testing unit that is connected to the ignition system of a vehicle. A driver must 
blow into the device and provide a breath sample to start a vehicle. If the breath sample 
indicates that a driver’s blood alcohol concentration (BAC) level is higher than a pre-specified 
limit, the vehicle will not start. Accordingly, IIDs have become an integral part of various DUI 
intervention efforts (and proposed efforts) which require (or would require) convicted DUI 
offenders to install an IID in their vehicle for a specific time period. 
Recent Trends in Use and Evaluations of IID Programs 
The implementation of IID programs has increased greatly over time to the point that currently 
all states in the U.S. have laws authorizing the use of IID devices to prevent impaired driving. 
Early versions of IID programs were mostly discretionary and managed by the courts. Over 
time, the administration of these programs in the U.S. has been shifting from courts to states’ 
driver licensing agencies, while some states have established a “hybrid approach” that combines 
components of both systems (United States Government Accountability Office, 2014). One of 
the main problems associated with use of the IID device was its susceptibility to circumvention 
attempts. Since its development, IID technology has improved by adding components that allow 
better prevention of potential circumvention attempts such as a retest system (driver must submit 
breath samples at random times after the engine is started) or a data recording system that 
captures information related to IID usage (i.e., BAC logs, the vehicle mileage and time interval 
1 

--- p36
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
when the vehicle was driven, etc.). Nonetheless, IIDs remain vulnerable to bypassing efforts, 
some of which are very simple, such as driving another vehicle without an IID (DeYoung, 
Tashima, & Masten, 2005). 
Like other more punitive DUI prevention efforts, IID programs are predominantly focused on 
repeat DUI offenders (those with at least one prior DUI conviction or an offense considered as 
prior for DUI) due to well-established evidence that these offenders struggle to change their 
drinking and driving behavior (Marques, Voas, Roth, & Tippetts, 2010). Still, there have been 
some attempts to use IIDs for first DUI offenders. One such effort, whose traffic safety benefits 
were recently investigated, occurred in Washington State, which enacted two IID laws affecting 
first DUI offenders in 2003 and 2004 respectively (McCartt, Leaf, Farmer, & Eichelberger, 
2013). The first law change, implemented in 2003, transferred the issuance of IID orders from 
the courts to the driver licensing department. The second law change, implemented in 2004, 
extended the issuance of IID orders from first time DUI offenders with BAC level 0.15% and 
above (‘high BAC’) or who refused the alcohol test (‘test refusal’), to include first ‘simple’ DUI 
(with BAC below 0.15%) offenders. According to the study findings, only one-third of the 
‘simple’ first DUI offenders ultimately installed an IID following the 2004 law change (instead 
of complying with IID requirement, these offenders had an option to be suspended for 1 year, 
after which they were able to apply for license reinstatement). However, the study results 
revealed a significant reduction in the recidivism rates associated with the same law change for 
the 2-year follow up period. Specifically, cumulative recidivism rates of first ‘simple’ DUI 
offenders decreased by an estimated 12% in the 2-year time period, while all first DUI offenders 
(‘simple’, ‘high BAC’, and ‘test refusal’ first DUI offenders combined) had an 11% lower 
recidivism rate in the same time period. The study authors claimed that a decline in recidivism 
rates could have been greater if larger proportion of first DUI offenders installed IIDs. The study 
also found an 8% reduction in single-vehicle late-night crashes associated with the 2004 law 
change. In January 2011, the State of Washington implemented mandatory IID installation orders 
that can be lifted only after a driver has had an IID installed for at least the last 4 months of their 
mandatory installation  period (without any reports of noncompliance). 
According to prior research studies, when DUI offenders who are ordered to install an IID have 
an alternative option, they will choose that option rather than comply with an IID installation 
order. For example, if they can be exempted from the IID requirement by claiming not to own a 
vehicle, they will do that. Or, if allowed by law, DUI offenders will rather serve a full suspension 
period than to have an IID-restricted license. In some instances, they might even risk driving on a 
suspended/revoked license (Elder et al., 2011; Marques, Voas, Roth, & Tippetts, 2010; Voas, 
2 

--- p37
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Tippetts, & Grosz, 2013). Consequently, some states have established mandatory IID programs 
that require IID installations for a specified time period as a condition for full reinstatement of 
the driver’s license, while other states have attempted to enhance the compliance with the IID 
order by using some “less desirable” alternative sanctions if the DUI offender does not want to 
comply with the IID order. New Mexico and Florida used such mandatory IID programs, whose 
evaluation results are summarized below (Marques et al., 2010; Voas et al., 2013). 
In New Mexico, Santa Fe County, in collaboration with magistrate judges, mandated IID 
installation for all first and repeat DUI offenders with house arrest as the alternative option for 
those “who claimed to have given up driving or otherwise could not install an interlock” 
(Marques et al., 2010, p. 71). As a result, the Santa Fe Magistrate Court achieved a 71% IID 
installation rate during the 2-year period compared to the 13% installation rate detected in other 
New Mexico courts, where IID is mandated for aggravated (BAC of 0.16% or higher) first and 
repeat DUI offenders. The recidivism rates for the offenders from the IID group who installed 
an IID were 2.5 times lower than the rates of DUI offenders who did not install an IID 1 year 
after conviction. However, the Santa Fe County program ended after a district judge determined 
that magistrate judges did not have the authority to impose the mandatory use of house arrest on 
DUI offenders who did not comply with the IID requirement. 
Florida made an attempt to use IID installation for a pre-specified time period as a prerequisite 
for license reinstatement. In 2002, the state implemented the administrative reinstatement 
interlock program (ARIP), which imposed the above-specified IID installation requirement on all 
repeat DUI offenders, first DUI offenders with a BAC of 0.20% or higher, and on first DUI 
offenders who had a minor in the vehicle at the time of arrest. The evaluation of the ARIP 
program revealed that about half of offenders who completed their license revocation did not 
reinstate their licenses because they did not meet all license reinstatement requirements. The 
results further indicated that about 48% of first DUI offenders, 60% of second, and 55% of third 
DUI offenders who completed the hard revocation period installed the ordered IID. The authors 
of the study concluded that for all offenders who installed an IID, the recidivism rate was lower 
when the IID was actually installed on the vehicle than after it was removed. However, this 
conclusion appears to be based on descriptive statistics alone because the authors presented no 
inferential statistical tests. Thus, no strong conclusions regarding those differences can be drawn 
(Voas et al., 2013). 
Overall, predominant evidence from different IID program evaluations in the U.S. and 
internationally have consistently indicated that IIDs are effective in reducing DUI recidivism 
3 

--- p38
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
rates as long as the IID is installed in the offender’s vehicle. However, after the IID has been 
removed, this effect fades away, and recidivism rates tend to increase and to became equivalent 
to the levels of offenders who did not install an IID (Elder et al., 2011). 
History of IID Programs in California 
California is recognized as the first state to establish and evaluate one of the early IID 
intervention pilot programs (EMT Group, 1990). It was also the first state to pass legislation that 
authorized judges to order repeat DUI offenders to install IIDs in their vehicles (Fulkerson, 
2003). The first legislation gave judges discretionary authority to order IIDs for repeat DUI 
offenders. However, shortly after, it became obvious that judges were not sentencing most 
qualified repeat DUI offenders with the IID installment requirement. Consequently, follow-up 
legislation was enacted in 1993. Assembly Bill (AB) 2851 removed the discretionary component 
of the original IID law and required judges to order all repeat DUI offenders to install IIDs 
(DeYoung et al., 2005). Still, judges persisted in not requiring repeat DUI offenders to install 
IIDs, which is evident in the annual report of the California DUI Management Information 
System that continues to indicate that fewer than 20 percent of repeat DUI offenders receive the 
court order to install an IID in their vehicles (Oulad Daoud et al., 2015). 
In 1999, new legislation was implemented, AB 762, which overturned the previous IID law and 
added new provisions that, in addition to repeat DUI offenders, focused on persons convicted of 
violating California Vehicle Code (CVC) Section 14601.2 (driving while suspended for DUI 
conviction).  Under the new legislation, persons convicted of driving while suspended or revoked 
for a DUI offense were required to install an IID for a period not to exceed 3 years or until their 
driving privilege is reinstated. What made these offenders the next logical candidates for a 
mandatory IID law was a notion that they had already demonstrated that they present a risk to 
others on roads as they had been caught while driving on a suspended or revoked license for a 
DUI offense (DeYoung et al., 2005).  
Among additional provisions, the AB 762 law provided an incentive for repeat DUI offenders to 
reinstate early if they install an IID. The law also encouraged judges to use their discretionary 
authority to order first DUI offenders to install an IID if there are aggravating factors associated 
with their DUI offense, such as high BAC (defined as 0.20% or above at the time of the original 
law implementation or 0.15% under the current law), chemical test refusal, numerous traffic 
violations, or involvement in injury crashes. 
4 

--- p39
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
AB 762 also required the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) to conduct an evaluation of the 
implementation of IID laws in California and an evaluation of the effectiveness of the AB 762 
law in reducing recidivism rates among persons convicted of DUI (violations of CVC 23152 or 
23153), and vehicle crashes related to the use of IID devices. The effectiveness evaluation study 
was comprised of six smaller studies where each study examined the effectiveness of IIDs in a 
different setting among either specific groups of DUI offenders or among persons convicted of 
driving while suspended for DUI offense (DeYoung et al., 2005). Four of the six studies 
evaluated the court-administered IID program through an IID installation order assignment or 
through a restriction to drive only a vehicle equipped with an IID. The two other studies 
narrowed their focus on the effectiveness of IIDs only among offenders who installed an IID in 
their vehicles. 
The DUI recidivism (measured by subsequent DUI convictions and DUI 
incidents) and crash rates were compared between IID and comparison groups. 
Three studies involved persons convicted of driving while suspended for DUI offenses (DWS­
DUI). The results of the first two studies indicated that DUI recidivism was not statistically 
different between the DWS-DUI offenders with an IID court order or with a restriction to drive 
only a vehicle equipped with an IID and those who did not receive the same IID order or IID 
restriction. However, DWS-DUI offenders who were ordered by courts to install an IID or who 
were restricted to drive only a vehicle equipped with an IID had significantly lower crash risk 
(24% in the first and 42% the second study) than those who did not receive the same IID court 
order or IID restriction. The third study focused on both DWS-DUI and DUI offenders who 
actually installed an IID in their vehicles. 
The results indicated significantly lower DUI 
recidivism (18%) of the DWS-DUI and DUI offenders who installed IIDs when compared to the 
same type of offenders who did not install an IID. At the same time, DWS-DUI and DUI 
offenders who installed an IID in their vehicles had substantially higher crash risk (84%) than 
those who did not install an IID.  
The other three studies focused on DUI offenders only. 
The first two studies involved, 
separately, first and second DUI offenders with an IID court order or restriction and the last 
study concentrated on second DUI offenders who installed an IID device. The evaluation results 
among first DUI offenders indicated that IID court order or IID restriction was not associated 
with reductions in their subsequent DUI recidivism, thus suggesting that the IID program was 
not effective for first DUI offenders. Similar results were found when the relationship between 
IID court order or restriction and subsequent DUI conviction was examined among second DUI 
offenders. However, second DUI offenders with an IID court order or restriction had 13% lower 
risk of subsequent DUI incidents and 19% lower risk of a subsequent crash than second DUI 
5 

--- p40
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
offenders in the comparison group. Finally, the evaluation results among second DUI offenders 
who installed an IID indicated that these offenders had statistically different subsequent DUI 
recidivism and crash risk when compared to second DUI offenders who remained suspended. 
Specifically, the study results showed a directional but not statistically significant reduction in 
subsequent DUI convictions between the IID and the comparison group. However, second DUI 
offenders from the IID group had 41% lower risk of subsequent DUI incidents than second DUI 
offenders who were suspended. Also, second DUI offenders installing an IID had substantially 
higher (130%) risk of a subsequent crash than suspended second DUI offenders. 
Overall, the 2005 evaluation study results are mixed as was pointed out by the authors of the 
study (DeYoung et al., 2005). While the study results showed IIDs can, in specific contexts and 
among specific groups of offenders, reduce subsequent DUI recidivism, the results also indicated 
that IIDs can be associated with a substantial increase in crash risk, particularly among offenders 
who installed an IID, which makes the overall traffic safety benefit of IID devices, based on the 
study results, questionable. 
In the decade following the AB 762 law, two legislative bills pertaining to IID programs in 
California were enacted. The first law, AB 979, was implemented in 2006 and reduced the 
mandatory suspension/revocation period for repeat DUI offenders from a 12 to 30 month range 
to just 12 months if these offenders obtain an IID-restricted driver license. The second law, 
Senate Bill (SB) 1388, implemented in 2009, transferred regulatory authority for the 
administration of all mandatory IID programs in California from the state courts to the DMV. 
The law also authorized DMV to require any driver convicted of driving with a suspended or 
revoked license, due to a prior DUI offense, to install an IID in any vehicle that the driver owns 
or operates. 
On July 1, 2010, two IID-related legislations were implemented in California: SB 598 and 
AB 91. SB 598 (see Appendix E) allowed second and third offenders convicted of an alcohol-
only misdemeanor DUI offense (CVC 23152) the option of obtaining a restricted driver’s license 
after completing a 90-day suspension period for a second misdemeanor DUI, or a 6-month 
suspension period for a third misdemeanor DUI if they, among other conditions, installed an IID. 
These offenders were required to have an IID-restricted driver’s license for the duration of their 
original license suspension period. In addition, a third bill, SB 895, effective June 22, 2010, 
provided clean-up legislation for SB 598 and terminated the 1-year Administrative Per Se (APS) 
license suspension if a person has been convicted of a misdemeanor DUI and the person meets 
6 

--- p41
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
all specified conditions for a restricted license under the SB 598 law including the installation of 
an IID. 
The AB 91 IID Pilot Program 
AB 91 (see Appendix A) added CVC Section 23700, establishing a pilot program in Alameda, 
Los Angeles, Sacramento, and Tulare Counties, from July 1, 2010 to January 1, 2016. This pilot 
program required all offenders convicted of first-time or repeat DUI offense (CVC 23152 and 
23153) to install an IID on all vehicles they own or operate for a specified period of time in order 
to obtain a restricted, reissued, or reinstated driver’s license. The required time period for the 
IID installation is based on the number of prior DUI convictions, and it ranges from 5 months for 
first-time DUI offense to 48 months for a fourth or any subsequent DUI violation. 
DUI offenders that are subject to the AB 91 pilot program are identified through the process of 
DMV receiving an abstract of a conviction of CVC Sections 23152 or 23153 from the courts in 
one of the four pilot counties for violations between July 1, 2010 and January 1, 2016. 
Subsequent to receiving the court abstract, the DMV is required to send a letter (see Appendix B) 
to the pilot-program participants informing them of the IID installation and other program 
requirements. The cost of the IID installation and maintenance is the responsibility of the DUI 
offender. However, if the DUI offender’s income is below the federal poverty level, the IID 
providers are responsible for absorbing a predetermined percentage of the cost, according to the 
formula stated in the AB 91 law. 
Drivers who are subject to AB 91 may qualify for an exemption, within 30 days of receiving 
notice from DMV regarding the IID requirement, if they do not own or have access to a vehicle. 
The exemption requests are thoroughly examined by DMV before they are approved. 
In addition, AB 91 also required the DMV to report to the Legislature, by January 1, 2015, on the 
effectiveness of the pilot program “in reducing the number of first-time violations and repeat 
offenses of CVC Sections 23152 and 23153 in the Counties of Alameda, Los Angeles, 
Sacramento, and Tulare.” As a result, the general deterrent evaluation of the IID pilot program 
study was completed (Chapman, Oulad Daoud, & Masten, 2015). To respond to the legislative 
requirement specified in the AB 91 law, this evaluation encompassed the analyses of data at the 
general county level (i.e., general deterrence). Data on California drivers convicted of a DUI 
offense from July 1, 2007 to June 30, 2013, obtained from abstracts of convictions reported to 
DMV by California courts, were used in the study (data on alcohol- or drug-reckless convictions 
7 

--- p42
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
–CVC 23103.5—were also included in some of the analyses). The conviction data were 
aggregated by county (i.e., differentiating between the pilot counties and non-pilot counties 
combined), conviction type (DUI or alcohol- or drug-reckless), DUI offender level (first, second, 
and third-or-more), and violation date (month/year). 
The study examined the IID installation rates of convicted DUI offenders per their violation 
month, for each DUI offender level, separately for each pilot county, and for all non-pilot 
counties combined. Further, to evaluate the association of the IID pilot program with any 
reduction in DUI offenses in the pilot counties, monthly rates of DUI convictions (combined 
with rates of alcohol- or drug-reckless convictions for some analyses) per 100,000 licensed 
drivers age 16 or older were calculated for each pilot county and for all non-pilot counties 
combined. The study used Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) interrupted 
time series analyses as the analytical technique to compare the rates of DUI convictions before 
and after the IID pilot program implementation, adjusted for changes observed in the non-pilot 
counties and for other factors that may bias the rates comparison. 
According to the study results, IID installation rates increased considerably during the pilot 
period in the pilot counties. Of all DUI offenders from all pilot counties combined, 42.4% 
installed IID during the pilot period compared to 2.1% during the pre-pilot period. IID 
installation rates among all DUI offenders in non-pilot counties increased modestly from 2.5% to 
4.3% during the same time period. IID installation rates were highest among first DUI offenders 
(46.7%), followed by lower rates among second (33.2%), and third-or-more (15.7%) DUI 
offenders. 
The results of the ARIMA time series analyses indicated that, after adjustments for changes 
observed in the non-pilot counties and other covariates, the license-based rates of DUI 
convictions among first, second, and third-or-more DUI offenders in the pilot counties during the 
pilot program were not significantly different from the rates of the same DUI offender groups 
during the pre-pilot program. 
Similar results were found when the adjusted license-based rates of combined DUI and alcohol-
or drug-reckless convictions were compared. There were no differences in those rates among 
first, second, and third-or-more offenders between the pre-pilot and the pilot period. The only 
difference was found when the adjusted license-based rates of combined DUI and alcohol- or 
drug-reckless convictions were compared among second DUI offenders collectively in all pilot 
8 

--- p43
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
counties, which indicated 3.7% higher rates during the pilot period than during the pre-pilot 
period. 
Consequently, the main conclusion from the legislatively-mandated general deterrent evaluation 
of the AB 91 IID pilot program was that this program does not appear to be associated with a 
reduction in the number of first-time or repeat DUI convictions in the pilot counties. Still, it was 
important to assess if the pilot program has the capacity to provide a general deterrent effect on 
the general population of California drivers before they eventually engage in drinking and 
driving behavior including those that are not yet, but might potentially become, DUI offenders. 
However, this evaluation did not provide information about the specific deterrence effects of the 
AB 91 pilot program. Specifically, the study did not investigate whether the pilot program is 
associated with changes in the specific behavior of individual drivers who were convicted of 
DUI during the pilot program implementation in one of the pilot counties and thus were subject 
to the IID pilot program requirements. Therefore, the current study was conducted as a follow-up 
to determine if the AB 91 pilot program has any specific deterrent effects. In addition, it was 
strongly recommended in the 2015 general deterrent evaluation that no legislative action, such as 
the statewide implementation of the pilot program, be taken until the specific deterrence 
evaluation is completed. 
Evaluation Objective 
The present study presents a specific deterrence evaluation of the AB 91 IID pilot program. The 
purpose of the study is to provide empirical evidence that may be used by policy-makers (and 
others) to consider the potential consequences—both intended and unintended—of broader 
expansion of the AB 91 IID program. To properly conduct such an evaluation, it is necessary to 
examine not just the intended (or presumed intended) outcomes of the program, but also certain 
unintended (or presumed unintended) outcomes.  
It is assumed that a primary intended outcome of the AB 91 pilot program is a reduction in 
subsequent DUI recidivism. DUI recidivism can be measured by looking at subsequent DUI 
convictions or at subsequent DUI-related incidents. 
It is also possible for laws to have unintended (i.e., an increase in crashes) effects. It may not 
always be possible to delineate the precise mechanisms that lead to these unintended effects. 
Nevertheless, it is presumed that any judgment as to the ultimate traffic safety value of a 
9 

--- p44
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
proposed program must take into account, when possible, unintended effects. To do otherwise 
would be to leave unexamined certain critical information about the overall impact of a program 
on the safety of the users of California’s roads. Any proposed change to DUI sanctions may have 
an associated effect on crashes—even where that associated effect was unintended. Because 
alcohol and drug impairment plays an important role (often causal) in a substantial proportion of 
fatal/injury crashes in California, it is therefore vital to understand, to the extent possible, both 
the intended and unintended effects that proposed changes to DUI sanctions may have on crash 
outcomes. 
As detailed above, the provisions of AB 91 are similar to other IID programs in the U.S. Namely, 
in contrast to other existing (and also previously described) statewide implemented IID programs 
in California, this pilot program (1) is mandatory rather than optional; (2) is administered by the 
California DMV rather than by courts; (3) in addition to repeat DUI offenders, also includes first 
DUI offenders; and, finally, (4) uses an IID installation for a pre-specified time period as a 
condition for full license reinstatement. 
Because the implications of the AB 91 pilot program are distinctly different, more inclusive, and 
more consequential than the implications of other currently-existing IID programs in the state, it 
is necessary to determine if this program is associated with differences in DUI recidivism and 
crashes between DUI offenders in the pilot counties who were subject to and complied with the 
IID pilot program requirements and those who were not subject to the pilot program. Since the 
unit of the analyses for this evaluation is at the individual driver level, a sufficient follow-up time 
was required to capture subsequent DUI convictions, DUI-related incidents, and crash 
involvement information for different groups of DUI offenders, before this evaluation could be 
conducted. A discussion of the two types of evaluations conducted separately for each of the 
three different DUI offender groups (first, second, and third and subsequent) is presented in the 
following paragraphs. 
AB 91 Intent-To-Treat Evaluation 
The AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation was conducted separately for each of three DUI offender 
groups (first, second, and third and subsequent) by way of comparing subsequent DUI recidivism 
and crash involvement of DUI offenders in the AB 91 pilot counties with the same type of 
offenders in non-pilot counties. These types of evaluations are characterized as “intent to treat” 
evaluations because they include all DUI offenders who were subject to the AB 91 law 
regardless of whether or not they complied with the law. As demonstrated in prior research 
10 

--- p45
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
studies, this type of analytical approach that includes all DUI offenders from the pilot counties, 
the ones that complied and those who failed to comply with the program requirements, is crucial 
to fully understand the effectiveness of all components of the pilot program. Namely, the 
offenders who did not comply with the pilot program are a part of a complete picture of the pilot 
program and should not be excluded from the intent-to-treat evaluation. As discussed in the 
following sections of the report, the comparison groups of like DUI offender groups from non 
AB 91 pilot counties consisted of drivers who either complied or did not comply with their DUI-
related sanctions and/or license restriction/reinstatement requirements. 
AB 91 IID/Restricted License Evaluation 
As with the previous type of evaluation approach, the AB 91 IID/restricted license evaluation 
was completed separately for first, second, and third and subsequent DUI offenders. The focus 
of the AB 91/IID-restricted license evaluation involved a comparison of subsequent DUI 
recidivism and crash involvement of DUI offenders from the AB 91 pilot counties who complied 
with all pilot program requirements and obtained an IID-restricted license with an eligible 
comparison group of similar DUI offenders who did not obtain an IID-restricted license. That is, 
the comparison group consisted of offenders who remained on a suspended or revoked driver 
license during the study time period. The AB 91 IID/restricted license evaluation allowed for 
comparisons between DUI offenders with IID-restricted licenses under the AB 91 law and those 
with suspended/revoked driver license during the same time period. Since licensing sanctions are 
one of the most proven-effective DUI countermeasures, it was important to understand outcomes 
associated with the AB 91 pilot program in the context of these existing DUI countermeasures. 
11 

--- p46
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
12 

--- p47
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
METHOD 
The methodology adopted for the present study is heavily patterned on that used by DeYoung 
et al. (2005) in their benchmark evaluation of the effectiveness of ignition interlock laws in 
California. Some methodological details are reserved for the Results section because they are 
more understandable within the context of the study findings.  
Subject Selection 
Data on all drivers convicted of a DUI offense (CVC 23152) with violation dates from July 1, 
2010 through June 30, 2013 were obtained from abstracts of conviction, which are reported to 
DMV by all California courts and stored on the Department’s Driver Record Master (DRM) 
database. Data were extracted in January 2015, which allowed enough follow-up time to 
conduct separate outcome analyses for the three DUI offender groups (defined in detail in the 
following paragraph).  
For all DUI offenders selected for the study, DUI offender level was used to differentiate 
between first, second, and third and subsequent DUI offenders. As defined under CVC Sections 
23536 – 23568, drivers who did not have a conviction considered as a prior for DUI within 10 
years from the violation date of their current DUI conviction were categorized as first DUI 
offenders. Drivers convicted of a DUI with one conviction considered as a prior for a DUI 
(according to the same CVC Sections mentioned above), within 10 years from the violation date 
of their current DUI conviction, were identified as second DUI offenders. Finally, drivers 
convicted of a DUI with two or more convictions considered as prior for DUI, within 10 years 
from the violation date of their current DUI conviction, were identified as third and subsequent 
DUI offenders. 
Separate outcome analyses were conducted for each DUI offender group due to considerable 
differences in the respective post-conviction licensing sanctions and associated requirements to 
obtain a restricted license and/or to reinstate a driving privilege. These differences exist both in 
the statewide provisions regulating DUI and in the AB 91 requirements within the pilot counties. 
Specific details pertaining to the statewide post-conviction licensing sanctions and to 
requirements for a restricted and/or reinstated driving privilege, relative to a particular DUI 
offense and DUI offender level, are described in CVC 13352 – 13352.5. Further, the AB 91 pilot 
program components are specified in CVC 23700. Some of these provisions are described in the 
13 

--- p48
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
following paragraphs, specifically those that necessitated a need to separate all study subjects 
into three distinct DUI offender groups and thus to conduct separate outcome analyses for each 
group. 
Upon a first conviction of CVC Section 23152, a person is subject to a license suspension for a 
period of 6 months. According to the AB 91 pilot program requirements, first DUI offenders 
whose conviction under CVC 23152 occurred in one of the AB 91 pilot counties must install an 
IID device in all vehicles they own or operate for a period of 5 months. 
Second DUI offenders convicted of CVC 23152 are subject to license suspension for 2 years. 
The AB 91 pilot program requires these offenders from the pilot counties to drive a vehicle 
equipped with IID for a period of 12 months upon conviction of the same CVC Section. 
Finally, third and subsequent DUI offenders convicted of CVC 23152 are subject to a license 
revocation for a period from 3 to 4 years. Under the AB 91 pilot program, those whose DUI 
offense occurred in one of the pilot counties are required to operate a vehicle equipped with an 
IID for a mandatory period ranging from 2 to 3 years. 
In addition, all repeat DUI offenders (second and subsequent) must complete an initial 12 
months of the suspension/revocation period before they can apply for an IID-restricted driving 
privilege. Furthermore, under provisions of SB 598 and as described in the Introduction section, 
second and third offenders convicted of CVC 23152, when alcohol-only (as opposed to drugs) 
was involved, may obtain an IID-restricted driver license after completing a shorter initial 
suspension/revocation period. Specifically, second offenders under SB 598 can apply for a 
restricted license after 90 days, and third offenders after 6 months, of the original post-conviction 
suspension/revocation period.  
The IID installation requirement for a pre-defined time period is just one of the requirements 
which DUI offenders in the AB 91 pilot counties have to comply with in order to obtain either a 
restricted driver license or to reinstate their driving privilege. Among other conditions are the 
following: (1) DUI treatment program enrollment or completion depending on DUI offender 
status, (2) proof of financial responsibility, and (3) paying various restriction or reissue fees. 
However, the IID installation requirement is not a mandatory requirement for license 
reinstatement in other currently-existing statewide IID programs (e.g., SB 598).  
14 

--- p49
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Therefore, based on above-mentioned conditions pertaining to different DUI offender groups, the 
follow-up period for each DUI offender group in this study was selected to coincide with post-
conviction licensing sanctions and the AB 91 pilot program requirements discussed above. 
Specifically, the post-conviction follow up periods for all analyses presented in the following 
sections were for a maximum of 12 months for the first DUI offender group, 30 months for the 
second DUI offender group, and 42 months for the third and subsequent DUI offender group. 
The driver records were also screened to identify and exclude from the evaluation any drivers 
who did not meet specified subject-selection criteria in order to eliminate any confounding or 
misleading results.  The excluded cases consisted of the following: 
 Deceased drivers; 
 Drivers residing outside of California; 
 Drivers who were never licensed to drive in California; 
 Commercial drivers; and 
 Drivers convicted of causing bodily injury and/or harm while under the influence of 
alcohol/dugs under CVC section 23153.1 
Study Enhancements 
Before proceeding with a discussion of the present study’s evaluations, it is important to present 
the reader with three major enhancements of the current study relative to the previously 
published general deterrence evaluation (Chapman et al., 2015). 
These enhancements are 
primarily related to the type of data analyzed in the present study.  The 2015 DMV evaluation (as 
legislatively required by the specific language in AB 91) analyzed data at the aggregated county 
level and examined changes in the rates of DUI and combined DUI/alcohol- or drug-reckless 
convictions in the four AB 91 pilot counties. The present evaluation, however, was based on 
individual level data and compared driver records of DUI offenders from both the AB 91 pilot 
and non-pilot counties. This approach was essential to determine if there were individual driver-
level differences in DUI recidivism and crashes between DUI offenders in the pilot counties 
(who were subject to and complied with the AB 91 pilot program) and those who were not 
1 Commercial drivers and drivers convicted of CVC 23153 were excluded from the study because their license 
control penalties and restriction/reinstatement requirements are substantially different from the majority of drivers 
convicted of an alcohol/drug offense (CVC 23152). The interested reader is referred to the California vehicle code 
for further information on sanctions applying to commercial drivers and/or to drivers convicted of CVC 23153. 
15 

--- p50
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
subject to AB 91 provisions (i.e., not convicted in a pilot county). Data analyzed at the 
individual level, as opposed to aggregate data, generally result in more sensitive analyses in that 
reliable differences are more likely to be detected when they exist. 
The first enhancement involved the application of a propensity score matching technique to 
statistically control for differences between treatment (AB 91 pilot county DUI offenders) and 
comparison (DUI offenders from non-pilot counties) groups. This enhancement was used 
because it was not possible to randomly assign DUI offenders to the two intervention groups.  
Such techniques (described in detail below) allowed for the formation of individual-level 
treatment and comparison groups consisting of like drivers. For example, a driver who was 
convicted of a DUI in an AB 91 pilot county was matched to a similar driver convicted of a DUI 
in a non-AB 91 pilot county, thereby equating them on preexisting characteristics (prior driving 
history information and demographic differences). These matching techniques were critical in 
removing preexisting biases to the extent possible that may not be attainable when analyzing 
aggregate-level data. 
A second enhancement allowed the use of specific statistical techniques (discussed below) to 
measure and detect individual differences between AB 91 pilot and non-pilot subjects over the 
time periods containing potential treatment-specific critical events. These events included those 
such as the primary outcome events of interest (i.e., crashes and DUI convictions), DUI related 
licensing action, and installation/removal of the IID. 
A third enhancement relates to the temporality of the current study’s analyses. That is, the 2015 
report was legislatively mandated and, therefore, had to be completed before adequate post-
conviction criterion data could be processed by courts and law enforcement agencies and 
updated to the department’s DRM. With the passage of time associated with the current study, 
additional post-conviction and crash-involvement driver record data were available and 
employed for the individual level analyses. This allowed for the incorporation of crash and 
conviction data that had not been updated on the Department’s database for use in the 2014 
evaluation. 
Study Evaluations 
Two evaluations for each DUI offender group were conducted. Specifically, the evaluations can 
be conceived as (1) an overall AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation and (2) an AB 91 IID/restricted 
license evaluation.  These two evaluations are described in detail below. 
16 

--- p51
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation. As detailed in the Introduction section above, the intent-to-treat 
evaluation conducted in the present study is an extension of the 2015 DMV general deterrence 
evaluation that assessed the impact of implementing the AB 91 pilot program in Alameda, Los 
Angeles, Sacramento, and Tulare Counties (Chapman et al., 2015).  
The intent-to-treat evaluation in the present study addressed a similar question to the one in the 
2015 report. That is, the current evaluation addressed the question as to whether the AB 91 pilot 
program in its entirety is associated with a positive or negative traffic safety impact as compared 
to other existing statewide treatment/intervention modalities (e.g., license suspension/revocation, 
other IID and license restriction programs) targeting specific DUI offender groups.  
To conduct the current AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation, one group of drivers who were not 
excluded were subjects whose driver record indicated that they did not comply with the AB 91 
pilot program restriction/reinstatement requirements by satisfying, among other conditions, 
installation for a predefined time period of an IID device in the vehicle(s) they operate. In an 
intent-to-treat evaluation, it is important to include such drivers because they represent part of 
the overall effect of the program, as pointed out by DeYoung et al. (2005). Consequently, all 
DUI offenders that are subject to the specific requirements of the AB 91 pilot program, 
regardless of whether they complied or chose not to comply with the program requirements, 
were included in the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation in order to provide a complete assessment 
of the positive and/or negative traffic safety impacts associated with this particular program. 
After identifying AB 91 eligible drivers (i.e., those convicted of a DUI offense in the four pilot 
counties during the pilot program implementation period), it was important to identify and select 
a comparison group of drivers. This pool of comparison drivers consisted of those who were 
convicted of a first, second, or third and subsequent DUI offense in one of the non-pilot counties 
during the AB 91 pilot program implementation period. As with the AB 91 subjects, this 
comparison group of subjects also consisted of those who complied or who failed to comply with 
their DUI related sanctions and license restriction/reinstatement requirements. The comparison 
group was identified by using DUI conviction information provided by California courts and 
recorded on the Department’s DRM.   
AB 91 IID/restricted license evaluation. While the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation described 
above evaluates the AB 91 program as implemented (and as intended), the evaluation of the 
AB 91 IID/restricted license is fundamentally different. That is, the AB 91 IID/restricted license 
evaluation can be viewed as an examination of the efficacy of IID devices as part of the AB 91 
17 

--- p52
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
pilot program restriction/reinstatement requirements. The evaluation detailed in this section 
addresses the potential effectiveness of the IID devices themselves, as prescribed under the 
AB 91 law.  This is of importance because although the AB 91 program in its entirety may not be 
effective, the IID devices and the associated IID-restricted license may or may not be effective in 
reducing DUI recidivism during or after the IID installation period among DUI offenders that 
complied with the AB 91 pilot program requirements. If such a situation exists, consideration 
should be given to revise the components of AB 91 pilot program to more effectively utilize the 
IID and associated restricted/reinstated license requirements. However, if the IID installation as 
part of the AB 91 program provisions for a restricted/reinstated driver license is shown to be 
associated with a negative traffic safety impact (i.e., increased crashes and/or increased 
convictions), there would be no empirical justification for continuing the AB 91 pilot program or 
for expanding it more broadly. 
To conduct the AB 91 IID/restricted license evaluation, the Department’s DRM was used to 
identify drivers with a qualifying DUI offense in one of the AB 91 pilot counties who installed 
an IID and satisfied other requirements to receive the AB 91 IID-restricted license. Comparison 
group drivers for this evaluation consisted of drivers convicted of the same offense (CVC 
23152), who remained suspended or revoked following their qualifying DUI conviction and, 
therefore, did not receive a restricted driver license.  
Research Design 
The research design used in the present study for both types of evaluations focuses on answering 
questions about the effectiveness of the AB 91 ignition interlock pilot program in California. In 
both evaluations, the design compares the post-conviction odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI 
conviction, DUI incident, and crash between treatment and comparison groups, as specified 
above for each evaluation. The rationale for this research design is that, all other things being 
equal, if the AB 91 pilot program is an effective traffic safety countermeasure, the outcome will 
be reflected in a lower risk of subsequent driver record entries of the treated drivers relative to 
comparison group drivers. As described in detail by DeYoung et al. (2005) and paraphrased in 
the following discussion, the key to such a design is all other things being equal. 
If all other things are not equal, then there can be other, extraneous factors, that can account for 
and influence differences in subsequent driving behavior between the AB 91 treated drivers and 
the comparison drivers, in addition to the effect of the AB 91 treatment. For example, if AB 91 
treated DUI offenders have worse prior driving records than DUI offenders in the comparison 
18 

--- p53
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
group, one would expect that these AB 91 treated DUI offenders would have worse subsequent 
records of DUI convictions and crashes, apart from any AB 91 treatment (i.e., an IID-restricted 
license) that they received. In other words, preexisting characteristics or differences between 
groups could bias the results and, therefore, render the study finding ambiguous and/or 
misleading. 
As noted in such classic research design texts such as Kirk (1968) and Campbell and Stanley 
(1963), the gold standard in evaluation research is to randomly assign subjects to the groups 
being compared to insure that extraneous factors are spread evenly among the groups. 
Unfortunately, random assignment was not possible in the present study. Rather, drivers in the 
present study residing in the AB 91 counties “choose” (either intentionally or unintentionally) 
whether to fulfill the requirements to obtain a restricted license. This “self-selection” bias could 
influence the magnitude and direction of the study results.  
Consistent with the DeYoung et al. (2005) study, statistical controls were employed to attenuate 
as much of this potential preexisting group bias as possible.  These statistical controls occurred at 
two levels. The first was to match comparison drivers with treated AB 91 drivers on selected 
variables. The second was to remove as much remaining bias as possible during the analyses by 
using covariates in the final statistical models. 
This section of the report will present a 
discussion of the matching process; the discussion of the use of the covariates will be reserved 
for the analysis section of the report. 
Comparison drivers for the study’s two evaluations were matched to treated drivers through the 
use of propensity scores, following the work of Rosenbaum and Rubin (1985).2 Propensity 
scores can be thought of as predicted values, and, as used here, they reflect the probability that a 
driver was in an AB 91 treatment group. Propensity scores were calculated for all drivers in the 
AB 91 pilot and non-pilot counties in California by using SAS PROC LOGISTIC to perform a 
multiple logistic regression analysis that incorporated demographic and prior driving record 
variables as predictors in the model.3 
After the propensity scores were computed for all drivers, the next step was to match control 
drivers to the treated drivers. SAS software programs were written to perform the matching for 
2 For this study, a greedy match algorithm initially developed by Lori Parsons as presented by Friedman and 
Thurman (2012) was used.
3 For a detailed discussion of logistic regression, the interested reader is referred to Hosmer and Lemeshow (1999). 
19 

--- p54
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
both the AB 91 intent-to-treat and AB 91 IID/restricted license evaluations.4 
For each 
evaluation, the SAS program compared the propensity scores for each comparison driver from 
the pool of such drivers to the score of the selected AB 91 treatment group driver. The SAS 
program then selected the control driver with the closest propensity score to include in the final 
sample of comparison drivers. In this way, the comparison drivers selected for the final AB 91 
intent-to-treat evaluation and AB 91 IID/restricted license evaluation samples were as similar as 
possible to the treatment group drivers on those variables used to form the propensity scores. 
This technique resulted in a reduction in the potential preexisting group differences that could 
potentially bias the study results. The final sample sizes and average propensity scores for all 
groups used in the subsequent analyses are presented in Table 1. 
The appropriate comparisons in Table 1 involve a DUI offender group within the specific 
evaluation type. For example, an examination of the mean propensity scores for the first 
offender AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation shows nearly identical scores for both the 60,091 
treatment and 60,091 comparison group subjects (0.269718 and 0.269714, respectively). This 
implies that the two groups are equated on potentially biasing factors (within five significant 
digits) and can be compared on the outcome measures. The reader will note from the table that 
the values within each DUI offender group are approximately equal for each evaluation type, 
indicating that the matching algorithm was successful in producing balanced study groups to be 
used in the subsequent analyses.5 
To formally test the success of the matching process, a multiple logistic regression was 
conducted for each DUI offender group within each evaluation type. The results yielded no 
statistically significant (reliable) post-match treatment/comparison group discrimination on the 
variables used to construct the propensity score matched samples.6 For demonstration purposes, 
the interested reader is referred to Appendix Table C for the post matching descriptive statistics 
associated with four variables used to compute the propensity scores. 
4 For a detailed discussion of the use of SAS and its application to the propensity score models used for the present 
study, the interested reader is referred to Friedman and Thurman (2012).
5 See Appendix D which lists the variables assessed for the propensity score model. 
6 A test of statistical significance allows one to determine the probability that an observed difference is due to 
chance alone. If this probability is sufficiently small, it is concluded that the difference is “real” and/or reliable. 
Unless otherwise stated, a difference in the present study was considered to be statistically significant when the 
probability of a difference that large or larger (in either direction) occurring by chance was less than 1 in 20 (p<.05). 
20 

--- p55
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Table 1 
Mean Propensity Scores and Sample Sizes for Study Groups 
Study group 
AB 91 intent-to-treat 
evaluation 
AB 91 IID/restricted license 
evaluation 
Mean 
propensity score 
Sample size 
Mean 
propensity score 
Sample size 
First DUI offender 
Treatment 
Comparison 
Second DUI offender 
Treatment 
Comparison 
Third and subsequent 
DUI offender 
Treatment 
Comparison 
0.269718 
60,091 
0.269714 
60,091 
0.314026 
18,142 
0.313996 
18,142 
0.267828 
5,357 
0.267793 
5,357 
0.210829 
27,295 
0.210825 
27,295 
0.135989 
7,315 
0.135982 
7,315 
0.066896 
1,100 
0.066894 
1,100 
It is important to acknowledge that while the use of propensity score matching and covariates in 
statistical modeling are critical in reducing bias, such techniques cannot eliminate all potential 
bias as it is impossible to know all of the multivariate dimensions (measured and unmeasured) on 
which treatment and comparison groups differ that might affect the study results. As a result, the 
analyses presented in this study should be viewed as depicting statistically significant 
relationships between AB 91 pilot program interventions and subsequent traffic safety indices as 
opposed to providing definitive cause and effect evidence of AB 91 program interventions. 
Analysis 
Before producing the final statistical models for each evaluation, descriptive statistics were 
computed for all of the study variables in order to check for outliers, missing data, and potential 
multicollinearity issues. Means and variances were calculated for all covariates and outcome 
measures. Group means and variances were also calculated and compared between all study 
7
groups. 
7 The interested reader is referred to Tabachnick and Fidell (2001) for the techniques and protocol for data screening 
and for assessing potential problems with the data by examining indices such as measures of central tendency, 
dispersion, etc. 
21 

--- p56
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
The same analytical procedures were used for both the AB 91 program and AB 91 IID/restricted 
license evaluations. For each evaluation, statistical models were developed separately for three 
outcome (criterion) measures: (1) days to first subsequent DUI conviction, (2) days to first 
subsequent DUI incident (i.e., APS suspension, alcohol- or drug-involved crash, DUI conviction, 
or DUI Failure-to-Appear violation), and (3) days to first subsequent crash (i.e., any traffic 
crash—property damage and/or injury/fatal reported to the Department by law enforcement or 
involved drivers). Cox regression, a particular form of survival analysis, was used to analyze 
these three measures.8 
Cox regression is one of the most appropriate and powerful methods for evaluating potential 
program effects when (as was the case with the present study) the interest is time to a first event 
such as a crash and conviction and when study subjects have differing amounts of time in a study 
and are subject to censoring (lost to follow-up). In addition, the technique is desirable because it 
can eliminate the effects of higher-level interventions that occur, for example, when a first DUI 
offender accumulates a second DUI offense and becomes eligible for sanctions associated with a 
second or subsequent DUI conviction. For example, since the effects associated with a second 
DUI conviction are present in the raw data for the first DUI conviction intervention group, it was 
important to use a statistical technique to eliminate these effects and make it possible to estimate 
the separate AB 91 treatment intervention impact within each DUI offender group.9 
Another important aspect of Cox regression is that covariates can be used in the model. In the 
Cox models constructed for the present study, demographic and prior driving indices were 
included as covariates to assist in bias control. These covariates were entered in a hierarchical 
fashion. That is, the covariates were entered first in the Cox model, and group (i.e., treatment 
versus comparison) was entered after the covariates, which allowed assessing whether AB 91 
treatment affected a particular traffic safety outcome after controlling for the covariates.  
Specifically, the initial step of the statistical modeling for the criteria measures associated with 
each evaluation was to select potential covariates to use in the model. This was accomplished by 
first examining, for each potential covariate, its simple correlations with the treatment group 
8 For a detailed presentation of Cox regression analysis, the interested reader is referred to Hosmer and Lemeshow 
(1999) and Allison (1995).
9 The authors would like to note that although Cox regression is a very powerful statistical technique for the reasons 
cited, it does have its shortcomings. For example, since there is no intercept term, the equation cannot be used to 
predict survival time. Additionally, the Cox model does not provide individual estimates of group-specific hazard 
rates. This may be important in studies where the absolute differences are as important as the relative differences. 
For example, a hazard ratio of 2 may have much more “clinical” significance if the hazard rates were .50 and .25 
rather than .02 and .01. 
22 

--- p57
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
variable and with the outcome measure. The variable was selected as a potential covariate if its 
relationship with both measures was statistically significant. The next step involved using SAS 
PROC PHREG to run a backward elimination Cox regression analysis by using all potential 
covariates identified in the first step as predictors and the specific outcome measure (e.g., days to 
first subsequent crash) of interest as the outcome or criterion measure. Covariates found to be 
significant in the selection models were retained for use in the final treatment/outcome Cox 
regression equations.  
Following covariate selection, SAS PROC LIFETEST was used to produce Kaplan-Meier 
estimates of the sample (no covariates) survivor, log negative log survivor, and hazard plots.  
These plots were used to assess the raw survivor and hazard functions for the AB 91 treatment 
and comparison groups not adjusted for covariates. These plots illustrated information on the 
groups’ survival over time in addition to the specific times at which they were at a particular risk 
of recidivating (i.e., risk for a subsequent DUI incident or crash). The plots were also used to 
determine if the hazards of the groups were proportional over time, a fundamental statistical 
assumption associated with Cox regression in order to correctly interpret the parameter estimates 
and odds/hazard ratios associated with the relationship between the outcome measures and 
treatment. 
A final statistical test of the proportional hazards assumption was performed by using SAS 
PROC PHREG to run Cox regression models that included the time (e.g., days to first crash) by 
covariate and the group by time interactions. As demonstrated by Hosmer and Lemeshow 
(1999) and Allison (1995), a violation of the proportional hazards assumption is not “fatal” to the 
analyses, but simply represents one of several possible model misspecifications appropriately 
handled by modeling the hazard ratios of the significant interactions in the final model. 
Following completion of the preliminary steps described above, the final Cox survival regression 
models were developed for each outcome assessed in both the AB 91 intent-to-treat and AB 91 
IID/restricted license evaluations. Following the protocol for hierarchically well-formulated 
statistical models, the final models included all of the covariates (if any were statistically 
identified as necessary), entered as a block, followed by any covariate by time interactions, the 
treatment group, and any treatment group by time interactions. This was done to assess the 
relationship between AB 91 treatment and the three outcome measures (i.e., DUI convictions, 
DUI incidents, and crashes) after adjusting for the covariates.  
23 

--- p58
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
In the Cox survival regression technique, the hazard ratio is a primary index (as opposed to 
means and mean differences in count regression models) of describing the relationship between 
the criterion or outcome measure and the treatment effect. As discussed in Tabachnick and 
Fidell (2001), the hazard ratio is interpreted as an odds ratio comparing the odds of an outcome 
in one group to the odds of the outcome in a comparison group over the time period of the study. 
These odds are computed from the regression coefficient or parameter estimate (B) as eB . A 
positive regression coefficient leads to an odds or hazards ratio greater than one while a negative 
coefficient leads to an odds or hazards ratio less than one. For example, assume one observes a 
hypothetical negative regression coefficient associated with treatment of -0.2300 for the crash 
criterion. The negative sign of the coefficient would indicate that treatment group drivers are 
less likely to be crashed involved relative to comparison group drivers over the course of the 
-0.2300 
study period.10 
Recall that e 
= 0.79; this indicates that the odds or hazards of crashing are 
decreased by about 21% [(1-.79)*100] for treatment group drivers relative to comparison group 
drivers over the course of the study. Unless otherwise stated, the statistical reliability of an 
AB 91 treatment effect hazard ratio (either positive or negative) was assessed by a chi-square 
significant at p = .05. Where appropriate, fitted survivor graphs were produced to provide a 
visual representation of the effects of AB 91 treatment on the criterion measure while controlling 
for any relevant covariates. 
10 This example assumes that the treatment group is coded 1 and the comparison group is coded 0. 
24 

--- p59
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
                                                 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
RESULTS 
AB 91 Intent-To-Treat Evaluation 
Before proceeding with the results, it is important to note that prior to modeling the final 
equations for each evaluation, DUI offender group, and outcome criterion, two critical analytical 
steps were conducted. The first step for each analysis was to examine the simple bivariate 
correlations and the results from an initial Cox regression model involving the 
treatment/comparison group drivers from Table 1 for all variables assessed in the computation of 
the propensity score. This was done in order to identify and select covariates, if needed, to 
further reduce any remaining bias between the treatment and comparison groups following the 
propensity score matching process. Any covariate that met the required level (p ≤ .05) of 
statistical significance was retained for inclusion as a covariate in the final model. The covariate 
selection process will be described in detail only as needed in the following sections.11 
The second step involved procedures used to check the adequacy of one of the main assumptions 
underlying the Cox regression model, that is, the proportional hazards assumption. 
This 
assumption requires that the hazard rates for the levels or groups defined by each predictor 
variable retained in the final model are proportional over time. This assumption was examined 
initially by creating difference plots of the log negative log function for each level of a predictor 
variable (Allison, 1995; Hosmer & Lemeshow, 1999). SAS PROC LIFETEST was used to 
produce sample survivor and hazard plots. These provided pictorial guidance as to the form of 
any potential non-proportionality. The definitive and final test for assessing the proportional 
hazards assumption was to create interaction terms for each predictor/covariate by time in a Cox 
regression model to determine whether the interaction was statistically significant (p ≤ .05). 
Unless described in detail in the following sections, the reader can assume that the proportional 
hazards assumption was met and that the Cox regression model was appropriately applied. In 
situations in which the assumption was violated, the alternative analytical technique (the 
extended Cox regression model which is described in detail) was used.12 
11 The interested reader is referred to Friedman and Thurman (2012) for a discussion of the biases that can be created 
if this step is omitted from analyses using propensity score matched samples.
12 The interested reader is referred to Ata and Sozer (2007) and to Patetta (2006) for discussions of potential 
misinterpretations and erroneous conclusions that can arise out of applying a proportional hazards model when the 
hazards are, in fact, non-proportional. 
25 

--- p60
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
First DUI Offenders 
The first DUI offender AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation assessed the association between the 
matched sample of 60,091 treatment group drivers and the 60,091 comparison group drivers 
identified in Table 1 on the three criteria measures described below. As stated in the Method 
section, the time period used for first DUI offenders was the subsequent 12 months. This time 
period was chosen to coincide with the post-conviction sanctions and liD/restricted license 
requirements associated with first DUI offenders. 
Davs to first subsequent DUI conviction. The initial analyses identified prior 3-year major 
convictions as the covariate and indicated that the proportional hazards assumption was not 
violated for the days to first subsequent DUI conviction. 13 
SAS PROC PHREG was used to fit the final Cox proportional hazards survival regression model 
for days to first subsequent DUI conviction. The final model consisted of prior 3-year major 
convictions and the treatment group variables as the predictors. The results are displayed in 
Table 2. 
Table 2 
First DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-to-Treat Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent DUI Conviction 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
PValue 
Hazard ratio 
Prior 3-year major convictions 
0.4545 
24.5995 
<.0001 
1.575 
Treatment/ contro I 
0.0448 
1.7883 
.1811 
1.046 
Note. Likelihood Ratio Chi Square = 21 .8072, p value < .000 I 
Although the prior 3-year major convictions covariate is statistically significant, the term of 
primary interest-treatment group-is clearly not statistically significant with a p value equal to 
.18. 14 Therefore, this analysis shows that there is no reliable difference in the number of days to 
13 Major convictions are associated with serious violations such as DUI, reckless driving, hit-and-run - most of 
which are alcohol/drug related. A major conviction results in two negligent operator points being charged to the 
individual's driver record. The interested reader is referred to Gebers and Roberts (2004) for the details associated 
with California's Negligent Operator Treatment System. 
140nce it is established that the test result is not statistically significant/reliable, the point estimate (here the hazard 
ratio of 1.046) presents non-substantive information reflecting sampling error and, therefore, is not a subject for 
further elaboration. For this type of statistical analysis, in the case of a non-significant test result, the confidence 
26 

--- p61
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
first subsequent DUI conviction between first DUI offenders in the AB 91 pilot counties and 
those in non-pilot counties. In other words, the AB 91 program is not associated with an 
increase or decrease in the odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction among first DUI 
offenders over the 12-month time period. This finding is illustrated in Figure 1. 
1.00 
non-pilot drivers 
~ 
0 
·.;:: 
pilot drivers
u 
-~ 
0 u 
0.99 
s 
Q 
i:: 
!:l 
'1) 
0"' 0.98 
"§ 
<ll 
<ll 
0 
~ 
~ 0.97 
~ 
<ll 
..... 
'1) > 
~ 
<.;..., 
0 
0.96 
~ 
0 
"€ 
0 
0.. £ 0.95 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
Days to first subsequent DUI conviction 
Figure 1. Final survival model: Number ofdays to first subsequent DUI conviction for first DUI 
offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation. 
Figure 1 displays the proportion of AB 91 pilot (treatment) and non-pilot (comparison) groups 
surviving (i.e., that do not have a subsequent DUI conviction) during the 12-month follow-up 
period from the original DUI conviction utilized for first DUI offenders. The reader will note 
that as with all figures subsequently presented in this report, a higher line for a group represents a 
lower odds or hazards of outcome (here DUI convictions). The most prominent feature of 
Figure 1 is that the survival rates for the two groups are very close together. This visually 
confirms the result from the statistical analysis presented in Table 2 that there is no reliable 
difference between first DUI offenders from the pilot counties (treatment group) and first DUI 
offenders from non-pilot counties (comparison group) in their number of days to first subsequent 
DUI conviction. 
interval contains 1.0, indicating no difference between the groups. For a discussion of statistical testing using p 
values and confidence intervals, the interested reader is referred to a classical text such as Kirk (1968). 
27 

--- p62
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Davs to first subsequent DUI incident. 
The initial analyses indicated prior 3-year major 
convictions was to be retained as a covariate in the final model and that the proportional hazards 
assumption was met for use of the Cox proportional hazards regression. 
SAS PROC PHREG was used to perform the final Cox regression modeling for days to first 
subsequent DUI incident criterion measure. This final model first fit the prior 3-year major 
convictions covariate and then assessed the statistical significance of the AB 91 intent-to-treat 
evaluation treatment group variable after adjusting for the covariate. The results of the analysis 
are presented in Table 3. 
Table 3 
First DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-to-Treat Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent DUI Incident 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
P Value 
Hazard ratio 
Prior 3-year major convictions 
0.5754 
61.5071 
< .0001 
1.778 
Treatment/control 
-0.0186 
0.4047 
.5247 
0.982 
Note. Likelihood Ratio Chi Square= 48.5509,p value < .0001 
While the prior 3-year major conviction covariate is statistically significant (p < .0001), the 
treatment variable with a p value of .52 is clearly not. This indicates that there is no reliable 
difference between the first DUI offenders in the pilot counties (treatment group) and those in 
the non-pilot counties (comparison group) in their number of days to first subsequent DUI 
incident. Therefore, there is no evidence that the AB 91 program is associated with a reduction 
or increase in the odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI incident over the 12-month time period. 
These results are pictorially presented in Figure 2. 
28 

--- p63
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
Days to first subsequent DUI incident 
1.00 
0.99 
0.98 
0.97 
0.96 
non-pilot drivers 
pilot drivers 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Figure 2. Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent DUI incident for first DUI 
offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation. 
Figure 2 illustrates the survival rates for the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation treatment and 
comparison groups. The figure clearly shows that the survival rates of the two groups on the 
days to first subsequent DUI incident are very similar. In fact, the lines are so close together at 
the majority of points that the survival rates are virtually indistinguishable. This confirms the 
results from Table 3 in that there is no statistically significant difference in days to first 
subsequent DUI incident between the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation first DUI offender 
treatment and comparison groups. 
Davs to first subsequent crash. 
Initial analyses indicated that the count of prior 3-year 
fatal/injury crashes was to be retained as a covariate in the final model and that the proportional 
hazards assumption was met. 15 
15 The number of fatal/injury crashes is a count of crashes in which one or more persons were injured or killed. The 
occurrence of fatalities/injuries is recorded for only police-reported crashes. Presumably, almost all fatal crashes and 
a high percentage of injury crashes are investigated by law enforcement and are recorded on the DRM. 
29 

--- p64
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
SAS PROC PHREG was used to produce the final Cox regression model. This model included 
the prior 3-year fatal/injury crashes covariate and the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation first DUI 
offender group treatment variable as predictors of the days to first subsequent crash outcome 
measure. The results are displayed in Table 4. 
Table 4 
First DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-to-Treat Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent Crash 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
P Value 
Hazard ratio 
Prior 3-year fatal/injury crashes 
0.0860 
3.9144 
.0479 
1.090 
Treatment/control 
-0.0625 
4.0063 
.0453 
0.939 
Note. Likelihood Ratio Chi Square = 7.8685,p value = 0.0196 
The reader will note from Table 4 that both of the predictors are statistically significant (p ::S .05). 
The treatment group effect is of particular importance. As displayed in Table 4, the treatment 
group is marginally statistically significant with a p value of .0453. 
For this analysis, the 
dichotomous treatment variable was coded AB 91 pilot treatment subject = 0 and comparison 
subject = 1. 
Therefore, the negative parameter estimate and associated hazard ratio < 1.0 
indicate that the hazard or odds of a subsequent motor vehicle traffic crash is less for the 
comparison group. That is, the first DUI offenders from non-pilot counties (comparison group) 
have a significantly lower subsequent hazard or odds of a subsequent crash relative to the first 
DUI offenders from the AB 91 pilot counties (treatment group) by approximately 6.1% [(1­
.939)* 1 00]. This is visually demonstrated in Figure 3. 16 
16 To explore the possibility of a crash-reporting bias affecting the results, the proportion of subsequent fatal/injury 
crashes to subsequent total crashes was calculated for each treatment/comparison group within both the AB 91 
intent-to-treat evaluation and AB 91 liD/restricted license evaluation samples. The number of casualty crashes 
forms a relatively "clean" measure because these crashes are usually much less subject to non-reporting than are 
property-damage-only crashes. If a reporting bias were present, one would expect the artifact to result in a sizable 
proportional difference between the two groups. However, the proportion of fatal/injury crashes to the total reported 
crashes did not significantly (p > .05) differ between any treatment/comparison group within this study' s AB 91 
program or liD/restricted license evaluations. 
30 

--- p65
non-pilot drivers 
1.00 
..c 
(/) 
pilot drivers 
CI:S 
..... 
(.) 
..... 
q v 0.99 
::s 
r:::r 
v 
(/) 
~ 
::s 
(/) 
0 c 0.98 
..c 
.-:! 
~ 
(/) 
..... v > 0.97
·;:::; 
-o 
'+-< 
0 
q 
0 
'€ 0.96 
0 
0.. 
0 
..... 
~ 
0.95 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
Days to first subsequent crash 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Figure 3. Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent crash for first DUI offenders 
in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation. 
Figure 3 confirms the findings from the statistical analysis shown in Table 4 in that the 
comparison group's survival curve is higher than that associated with the treatment group. That 
is, the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation results suggest that first DUI offenders from non-pilot 
counties (comparison group) survive longer without a subsequent traffic crash relative to those 
from the AB 91 pilot counties (treatment group). 
Therefore, the analyses associated with the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation for first DUI 
offenders show a lower hazards or odds of a subsequent crash over the 12-month period for the 
offenders in non-pilot counties relative to those in the pilot counties, even though there does not 
seem to be an association with the hazards or odds of a subsequent DUI conviction or DUI 
incident during the same time period. 
Second DUI Offenders 
The second DUI offender AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation assessed the association between the 
matched sample of 18,142 treatment group drivers and the 18,142 comparison group drivers 
31 

--- p66
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
identified in Table 1 on the three criteria measures described below. As stated in the Method 
section, the time period used for second DUI offenders was the subsequent 30 months from the 
qualifying DUI conviction. This time period was chosen to coincide with the post-conviction 
sanctions and liD/restricted license requirements associated with second DUI offenders. 
Davs to first subsequent DUI conviction. 
The initial analyses indicated that it was necessary to 
include prior 3-year major convictions as a covariate in the final analysis and that the 
proportional hazards assumption was met. 
The final Cox regression model included the prior 3-year major convictions covariate and the 
AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation treatment group variable, whose relationship with subsequent 
DUI convictions was adjusted for the relationship with the covariate. The results are presented 
in Table 5. 
Table 5 
Second DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-to-Treat Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent DUI Conviction 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
P Value 
Hazard ratio 
Prior 3-year major convictions 
0.3189 
69.3462 
< .0001 
1.376 
Treatment/ contro I 
-0.1140 
7.6042 
.0058 
0.892 
Note. Likelihood Ratio Chi Square = 75.2637, p value < .0001 
As displayed in the table, both predictors in the model are statistically significant. The statistical 
significance of the prior 3-year major convictions variable indicates that any preexisting 
differences on this dimension between the treatment and the comparison groups, that were still 
present subsequent to the propensity score matching, have been reduced. More importantly, the 
AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation treatment group effect is also statistically significant (p = .006), 
indicating that the AB 91 program is associated with the hazards or odds of a subsequent DUI 
conviction among second DUI offenders. The negative parameter estimate and hazard ratio 
( < 1.00) for the treatment group variable means that second DUI offender non-pilot subjects are 
associated with a lower hazards or odds of a subsequent DUI conviction when compared to 
AB 91 pilot subjects. Specifically, the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation non-pilot comparison 
group subjects are associated with a lower hazard or odds of a subsequent DUI conviction by 
10.8% [(1-.892)*100]. This difference is visually presented in Figure 4. 
32 

--- p67
non-pilot drivers 
1.00 
pilot drivers 
0.99 
...... ......
0.98 
..... ....... ......
0.97 
..... ....... ...... .......
0.96 
~ ........... ...... .......
0.95 
............. 
...._
....... 
...... .......-
0.94 
... -... --
0.93 
0.92 
0.91 
0.90 
...... 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
1000 
Days to first subsequent DUI conviction 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Figure 4. Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent DUI conviction for second 
DUI offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation. 
The figure shows that after approximately 200 days the survival rates of a subsequent DUI 
conviction for the two groups start diverging, with the trend becoming most notable after the first 
12 months (365 days). That is, non-pilot subjects have a higher survival throughout the majority 
of the study period, confirming the results from the statistical analysis. 
Days to first subsequent DUI incident. 
The initial analyses identified prior 3-year major 
convictions and prior 3-year repeat APS suspensions as the covariates for model inclusion. 17 In 
addition, no violation of the proportional hazards assumption was detected. 
The final Cox regression model fit the two covariates first, adjusting for their effects, followed 
by the AB 91 program treatment effect for second DUI offenders. 
The results of this analysis 
are presented in Table 6. 
17 The repeat APS actions variable represents a count of repeat APS license suspensions initiated due to at least one 
of the conditions listed in CVC 13353.2 that were present at the time ofDUI arrest. 
33 

--- p68
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Table 6 
Second DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-to-Treat Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent DUI Incident 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
P Value 
Hazard ratio 
Prior 3-year major convictions 
0.2889 
73.4864 
< .0001 
1.335 
Prior 3-year repeat APS actions 
0.0685 
6.2686 
.0123 
1.071 
Treatment/ contro I 
-0.1768 
23.8468 
<.0001 
0.838 
Note. Likelihood Ratio Chi Square = 107.1224, p value < .0001 
As displayed in the table, all effects are statistically significant. Of primary interest here is the 
effect associated with treatment group. The sign and magnitude of the parameter estimate and 
hazard ratio associated with the treatment group means that comparison group subjects are 
significantly associated with a lower odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI incident by 16.2% 
[(1-0.838)* 1 00]. This association is illustrated in Figure 5. 
1.00 
0.99 
0.98 
0.97 
0.96 
0.95 
0.94 
0.93 
0.92 
0.91 
0.90 
non-pilot drivers 
~~... 
pilot drivers 
...... ..., 
...,... ......... ..... ...... ...... ...... ...... ....... ...,...... ...... ......... -... ....... ............ ...... 
..................... 
................... ... .... 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
1000 
Days to first subsequent DUI incident 
Figure 5. Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent DUI incident for second 
DUI offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation. 
As was the case with the subsequent DUI convictions, Figure 5 shows that after approximately 
200 days, the survival rates of a subsequent DUI incident notably diverge with the AB 91 non­
34 

--- p69
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
pilot subjects having a higher survival throughout the study period. This trend confirms the 
results from the statistical analyses. 
Davs to first subsequent crash. The prior 3-year fatal/injury crashes covariate was identified for 
use in the final model consisting of the propensity score matched treatment/comparison groups. 
Diagnostic tests indicated that there were no violations of the proportional hazards assumption. 
The final Cox survival regression model predicting days to first subsequent crash first fit the 
prior 3-year fatal/injury crashes covariate, adjusted for its effects, and then entered the treatment 
group variable. The results are presented in Table 7. 
Table 7 
Second DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-to-Treat Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent Crash 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
PValue 
Hazard ratio 
Prior 3-year fatal/injury crashes 
0.1811 
9.9850 
.0016 
1.199 
Treatment/control 
0.0210 
0.2228 
.6369 
1.021 
Note. Likelihood Ratio Chi Square= 9.5515,p value= 0.0084 
The results from the table show that while the prior 3-year fatal/injury crashes covariate is 
statistically significant (p = .0016), the treatment group variable is not (p = .6369). Therefore, 
there is no reliable difference in the odds or hazards of a subsequent crash over the 30-month 
time period between the second DUI offender treatment and comparison group subjects from the 
AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation. This can be seen in Figure 6. 
35 

--- p70
..c 
1.00 
r/) 
;.... 
0 
~ 0.99 
...... 
!=: 
::: 
<l) 
0.98 
C"" 
<l) 
~ 
r/) 
0.97 
::: 
r/) 
0 
!=: 
0.96 
..c 
...... 
-~ 0.95 
r/) 
;.... 
<l) 
0.94 
>
·;:::: 
"0 
4-< 
0.93 
0 
!=: 
0 
0.92 
"€ 
0 
0.. 0.91
0;.... 
A.. 
0.90 
non-pilot drivers 
pilot drivers 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
1000 
Days to first subsequent crash 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Figure 6. Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent crash for second DUI 
offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation. 
The parallel, almost non-distinguishable, survival curves from Figure 6 for both the AB 91 pilot 
and non-pilot subjects confirm the statistical findings that there is no difference between the 
groups in regards to the odds or hazards of a subsequent crash over the 30-month time period. 
In summary, the analyses associated with the AB 91 second DUI offender intent-to-treat 
evaluation show that the non-pilot second DUI offender drivers have lower hazards or odds of a 
subsequent DUI conviction and DUI incident over the 30-month time period. However, the 
AB 91 pilot and non-pilot second DUI offender groups do not differ with respect to the hazards 
or odds of a subsequent crash over the same time period. 
Third and Subsequent DUI Offenders 
The third and subsequent DUI offender AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation assessed the association 
between the matched sample of 5,357 treatment group drivers and the 5,357 comparison group 
drivers identified in Table 1 on the three criteria measures described below. As stated in the 
Method section, the time period used for third and subsequent DUI offenders was the subsequent 
36 

--- p71
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
42 months. This time period was chosen to coincide with the post-conviction sanctions and 
liD/restricted license requirements associated with third and subsequent DUI offenders. 
Davs to first subsequent DUI conviction. 
The initial analyses identified pnor 3-year total 
convictions and prior 3-year repeat APS actions as the covariates to use in the subsequent DUI 
conviction outcome analysis for the AB 91 third and subsequent DUI offenders intent-to-treat 
evaluation.18 No violations of the proportional hazards assumption were detected. 
The final Cox proportional hazards regressiOn model entered the two covariates first. 
The 
second step involved entering the treatment group, thereby assessing the treatment effects after 
adjusting for the covariates. The results of the main analysis are presented in Table 8. 
Table 8 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
P Value 
Hazard ratio 
Prior 3-year total convictions 
Prior 3-year repeat APS actions 
Treatment/control 
0.0807 
14.1855 
.0002 
1.084 
0.0952 
9.0097 
.0027 
1.100 
-0.0642 
0.8171 
.3660 
0.938 
Note. Likelihood Ratio Chi Square= 29.3118, p value = 0.0001 
Third and Subsequent DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-to-Treat Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent DUI Conviction 
The prior 3-year total convictions and repeat APS actions covariates are statistically significant. 
More importantly, the results from Table 8 show that, after adjusting for the effects of the two 
covariates, the treatment group effect is not statistically significant (p = .366), indicating no 
reliable or systematic difference between the third and subsequent DUI offender AB 91 pilot and 
non-pilot intent-to-treat evaluation samples. This is pictorially confirmed in Figure 7. 
18 The prior 3- year total convictions variable consists of a count of the total number of convictions for a traffic 
offense, failure to appear (FTA) in court violations, and traffic violator school (TVS) dismissals. One citation 
results in a creation of one abstract of conviction and is counted as only one conviction, one FTA, or one TVS even 
if there are multiple violations included in the abstract (e.g., a driver is cited and convicted for speeding and failing 
to stop for a red light on one "ticket"). 
37 

--- p72
non-pilot drivers 
pilot drivers 
0 
q 
!=: 
0
-£ ·.;::;
·-
0.96 
~ ·
(.);; 
"' 
;.... 
q0 
0.95 
~ (.)
·;::: s 0.94 
~Q 
0 
0.93 
!=: 
0 ·-e 
0.92 
0 
£
0.. 
0.91 
0.90 ~.,.........,..-r"".....-T'""..-r"-.-r....,-......-.....--..........-...............-T'"".,........,,...............-T'""....................T-r-..........-r-r"..,...........-r"T.....-T""".,.......,................,...................... 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
1000 1100 1200 1300 
Days to first subsequent DUI conviction 
1.00 
= 
0.99
<l) = 
[ 
0.98 
~ 
~ 
0.97 
........~ 
""" ...... 
.......... ....... 
~-......_...._ -... ... _ 
.... _---... ~ ............ -------.... 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Figure 7. Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent DUI conviction for third and 
subsequent DUI offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to-treat 
evaluation. 
Figure 7 shows that while there is some small difference between the treatment and comparison 
groups on a subsequent DUI conviction, this difference is minimal. 
In other words, any 
difference is due to the result of sampling error. The findings from this analysis show no 
evidence of a difference in the odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction among the third 
and subsequent DUI offenders associated with the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation. 
Days to first subsequent DUI incident. Prior 3-year total convictions and prior 3-year repeat 
APS actions were selected as covariates for the subsequent DUI incident outcome measure. No 
violations of the proportional hazards assumption were detected for either the two covariates or 
for the treatment group variable. 
The final Cox regression model fit the two covariates first, adjusting for their effects, and 
followed by the main effect of treatment group. The results of this analysis are presented in 
Table 9. 
38 

--- p73
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Table 9 
Third and Subsequent DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-to-Treat Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent DUI Incident 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
P Value 
Hazard ratio 
Prior 3-year total convictions 
0.1124 
43.1498 
< .0001 
1.119 
Prior 3-year repeat APS actions 
0.0828 
10.0341 
.0015 
1.086 
Treatment/ contro I 
-0.1829 
9.6530 
.0019 
0.833 
Note. Likelihood Ratio Chi Square = 71.8160, p value < .0001 
As shown in the table, all model effects are statistically significant (p :S .05). The effect of 
interest is the treatment group which is clearly statistically significant (p = .0019). The negative 
parameter estimate and associated hazard ratio < 1.0 indicate that third and subsequent DUI 
offenders in the comparison (non-pilot counties) group have a lower odds or hazards of a 
subsequent DUI incident than third and subsequent DUI offenders in the treatment (AB 91 pilot 
counties) group. Specifically, the hazard ratio in Table 9 indicates that the third and subsequent 
DUI offenders in AB 91 non-pilot comparison group have an odds or hazards of a subsequent 
DUI incident approximately 16.7% [(1-.833)*100] lower than that of those in the AB 91 pilot 
treatment group. The difference between the two groups is graphically illustrated in Figure 8. 
39 

--- p74
1.00 
0.99 
0.98 
0.97 
0.96 
0.95 
0.94 
0.93 
0.92 
0.91 
0.90 
0.89 
0.88 
0.87 
0.86 
non-pilot drivers 
pilot drivers 
0.85~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
1000 1100 1200 1300 
Days to first subsequent DUI incident 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Figure 8. Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent DUI incident for third and 
subsequent DUI offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to-treat 
evaluation. 
The higher line in Figure 8 represents the survival rate of a subsequent DUI incident for the non­
pilot comparison group drivers, while the lower line is the rate associated with the pilot treatment 
group drivers. The figures illustrates that the comparison group drivers have a lower subsequent 
odds or hazards (i.e., greater survival) of a subsequent DUI incident than do the AB 91 pilot 
intent-to-treat evaluation treatment group drivers. This figure pictorially confirms the results of 
the statistical analysis presented in Table 9. 
Days to first subsequent crash. The prior 3-year total convictions covariate was selected for 
inclusion in the final survival analysis model. Diagnostic analyses indicated that there was no 
violation of the proportional hazards assumption. 
The final Cox proportional hazards regression model predicting days to first subsequent crash is 
presented in Table 10. 
40 

--- p75
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Table 10 
Third and Subsequent DUI Offender AB 91 Intent-to-Treat Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent Crash 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
P Value 
Hazard ratio 
Prior 3-year total convictions 
0.1591 
45.5510 
<.0001 
1.172 
Treatment/control 
0.0145 
0.0276 
.8680 
1.015 
Note. Likelihood Ratio Chi Square = 40.4231. p value < .000 I 
The results from the table show that while the pnor 3-year total convictions covariate IS 
statistically significant (p < .0001), the treatment group variable is not (p = .8680). This means 
that there is no reliable difference in the odds or hazards of a subsequent crash over the 42-month 
period between the third and subsequent DUI offender treatment and comparison group subjects 
from the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation. This outcome is illustrated in Figure 9. 
..c 
</) 
1.00 
Cl:l 
.... 
non-pilot drivers 
u 
...... 
~ 
pilot drivers 
v 
0.99 
= 
0"' 
v 
</) 
~ 
</)= 
0.98 
0 q 
..c 
...... 
- ~ 
0.97 
</).... 
.:::
v 
.... 
-o 
0.96 
,_ 
0 
0 
~ 
"€ 
0.95 
0 
0.. 
0.... 
0-. 
0.94~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
1000 1100 1200 1300 
Days to first subsequent crash 
Figure 9. 
Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent crash for third and 
subsequent DUI offenders in the pilot vs. non-pilot counties for the AB 91 intent-to-treat 
evaluation. 
The non-distinguishable, parallel survival curves from Figure 9 for the third and subsequent DUI 
offenders in both the treatment and comparison groups confirm the statistical findings that there 
41 

--- p76
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
is no difference between the groups in the odds or hazards of a subsequent crash over the 42­
month period. 
To summarize, the analyses associated with the AB 91 third and subsequent DUI offender intent­
to-treat evaluation show that the comparison group drivers have a lower odds or hazards of a 
subsequent DUI incident over the 42-month follow-up period. However, the two groups do not 
significantly differ with respect to the odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction and crash 
during the same time period. 
AB 91 liD/Restricted License Evaluation 
This section addresses the effect associated with the AB 91 ignition interlock device and the 
associated liD-restricted driver license. Specifically, drivers convicted of DUI in one of the four 
AB 91 pilot counties who actually installed an liD device and fulfilled all other requirements 
for obtaining the AB 91 liD-restricted driver license were identified as the treatment group 
subjects. For this evaluation, the propensity score technique matched DUI offenders in the 
treatment group with DUI offenders who did not install an liD nor receive a restricted driver 
license. 
In other words, the comparison group consisted of DUI offenders who remained 
suspended or revoked during the study time period. As stated in the Method section, the results 
from this AB 91 liD/restricted license evaluation address the question as to whether the liD 
devices themselves can be effective when the AB 91 liD-restricted license is granted, as 
compared to license suspension or revocation. 
First DUI Offenders 
The first DUI offender AB 91 liD/restricted license evaluation assessed the association between 
the matched sample of 27,295 treatment group drivers and the 27,295 comparison group drivers 
identified in Table 1 on their subsequent DUI convictions, DUI incidents, and crashes. As stated 
in the Method section, the time period used for first DUI offenders was the subsequent 12 
months. 
This time period was chosen to coincide with the post-conviction sanctions and 
liD/restricted license requirements associated with first DUI offenders. 
42 

--- p77
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Davs to first subsequent DUI conviction. The initial step identified gender as the covariate to use 
in the final outcome model. 
With the covariate selected, it was necessary to test whether there was a violation of the 
proportional hazards assumption associated with either the gender covariate or the treatment 
group variable. The initial test was informal. This test involved producing sample survival 
hazard plots for each variable and then checking the plots to determine whether the levels of that 
variable had hazards proportional over the course of the study. The plots for gender did not 
indicate an assumption violation. However, the plot associated with the treatment group variable 
showed evidence of a possible violation of proportional hazards. A somewhat more formal test 
involved producing and examining plots of the difference between log negative log survival for 
each variable. This also indicated a possible violation for the treatment group variable. 
The final and definitive check of the integrity of the proportional hazards assumption involved 
computing the likely forms of statistical interactions between each predictor and days to first 
subsequent DUI conviction in a Cox regression analysis and examining the statistical 
significance of the interactions. The results showed that although the gender covariate did not 
violate the proportional hazards assumption, the treatment group did. An examination of the 
results showed that this moderating relationship was adequately represented through a simple 
linear interaction with time. Therefore, in order to capture and represent the non-proportionality, 
the interaction between treatment and days to first subsequent DUI conviction was included in 
the final Cox regression models. 
The first model assessed the overall effects associated with the gender covariate, treatment 
group, and the treatment group by time interaction. The results of this analysis are presented in 
Table 11. 
Table 11 
First DUI Offender AB 91 liD/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent DUI Conviction 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
Gender 
0.2365 
PValue 
Hazard ratio 
14.2029 
.0002 
1.267 
Treatment/ contro I 
1.5804 
153.8694 
< .0001 
time 
0.0035 
37.4059 
< .0001 
Note. Likelihood Ratio Chi Square= 307.2504, p value < .0001 
43 

--- p78
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Although the gender covariate is statistically significant (p = .0002), the effects of primary 
interest in Table 11 are the statistically significant treatment group (p < .0001) and treatment 
group by time interaction (p < .0001). 19 
The presence of a significant treatment by time 
interaction means that the hazard ratio associated with the treatment group and the subsequent 
DUI conviction criterion measure varies by time. Therefore, it is not possible to represent this 
relationship with a simple survival curve figure or a single hazard ratio for either the treatment 
group or for the treatment group by time interaction terms (hence, no hazard ratios are provided 
for these two terms). 
One can, however, conclude from Table 11 that given the sign and 
magnitude of the parameter estimates associated with the treatment group and treatment group 
by time interactions, the AB 91 liD/restricted license treatment group has a lower hazards or 
odds of a subsequent DUI conviction and that this trend in the odds or hazards tends to diminish 
over time. 
With the existence of a statistically significant time by treatment group interaction as displayed 
in Table 11, the extended Cox regression model is the appropriate statistical technique to apply 
in order to fully describe the relationship between treatment and the DUI conviction criterion 
measure.20 The extended Cox regression model utilizes the parameters, such as those presented 
in Table 11, to construct and test hazard ratios for selected time intervals. For purposes of 
statistical significance testing, the hazard ratios are held constant for the specific time interval. 
For the days to first subsequent DUI conviction, the specific time intervals were selected to, first, 
follow the recommended methodological practice of providing relatively equal number of study 
subjects experiencing the event (occurrence of a subsequent DUI conviction during the 
subsequent 12-month study period) and censored subjects (no DUI conviction during the 
subsequent 12-month study period) across the time intervals. This ensures that the standard 
errors (not displayed) are similar. Secondly, the time periods were chosen to coincide with the 
temporal requirements of licensing sanctions, eligibility to obtain a restricted driver's license, 
and with the AB 91 pilot program required time length for liD installation associated with a first 
DUI offense. 
19 The reader will note that in the following tables, gender is used as a covariate in several analyses. Due to the 
structure of the data, the sign of the parameter estimate associated with gender is positive in some of the analyses 
and negative in others, resulting in a hazard ratio less than 1.0 or greater than 1.0. Regardless of the sign and values 
associated with the gender parameter estimates and hazard ratios, the interpretation is consistent in that males in all 
analyses in which gender is a covariate have, as expected, a higher odds of subsequent DUI convictions and/or DUI 
incidents. 
2 °For a detailed discussion of the extended Cox regression model, the interested reader is referred to Ata and Sozer 
(2007), Hosmer and Lemeshow (1999), and Patetta (2006). 
44 

--- p79
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Table 12 presents the time intervals and hazard ratios for the extended Cox regression model for 
the first DUI offender liD/restricted license program evaluation for days to first subsequent DUI 
conviction. 
Table 12 
First DUI Offender AB 91 liD/Restricted License Evaluation, Time Intervals and Hazard Ratios 
for the Extended Cox Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent DUI Conviction 
Treatment effect time interval 
Hazard ratio 
P Value 
0 to 182 days 
0.266 
198.8854 
< .0001 
183 to 365 days 
0.569 
44.9515 
< .0001 
For the extended Cox model in Table 12, the referent group is the AB 91 companson group. 
Therefore, the results indicate that during the first 182 days following their first DUI conviction, 
the AB 91 liD/restricted license group is associated with a 73% [(1-.266)* 1 00] lower odds or 
hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction. During days 183 to 365, the AB 91 liD/restricted 
license group is associated with a 43% [(1-.569)*100] lower odds or hazards of a subsequent 
DUI conviction. 
In summary, the extended Cox model confirms the results in Table 11 in that the AB 91 
liD/restricted license treatment group has a lower odds or hazards of subsequent DUI 
convictions and that this trend tends to diminish over the 12-month study period. 
Days to first subsequent DUI incident. Initial analyses identified gender as the covariate for use 
in the final survival model assessing the relationship between the treatment group predictor and 
days to first subsequent 12-month DUI incident. 
Sample survival and hazard plots of the gender covariate and the treatment group variable were 
inspected to assess if the levels of these variables violated the proportional hazards assumption. 
These diagnostic plots suggested that the treatment group variable might violate the proportional 
hazards assumption. However, in order to formally check for a violation of the proportional 
hazards assumption, interaction terms were created for treatment group by time (days to first 
subsequent DUI incident) and for gender (male versus female) by time. Each interaction term 
was entered into the Cox regression model after its respective main effect. The findings from 
45 

--- p80
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
this analysis showed that while there was no assumption violation associated with gender, the 
treatment group variable showed a violation of the proportional hazards assumption. 
Therefore, the final model entered gender first and then followed by the treatment group variable 
main effect and the treatment by time interaction term. This order adjusted the liD/restricted 
license treatment group effects associated with days to first subsequent DUI incidents for any 
effects of the gender covariate. Table 13 shows the findings from this analysis. 
Table 13 
First DUI Offender AB 91 liD/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent DUI Incident 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
P Value 
Hazard ratio 
Gender 
0.2184 
16.0437 
< .0001 
1.244 
Treatment group 
1.6159 
199.0571 
< .0001 
Treatment grou by time 
0.0035 
47.1234 
< .0001 
Note. Likelihood Ratio Chi Square = 414.5158, p value < .0001 
Table 13 shows that the gender covariate is statistically significant (p < .0001) in reducing 
residual bias from the treatment group variable. The primary effects of interest (treatment and 
treatment group by time) are also statistically significant (p < .0001 for both). As was the case 
with the DUI conviction analysis presented in the prior section, the significant treatment by time 
interaction means that the hazard ratio associated with the treatment group and subsequent DUI 
incident criterion varies with time. As a result, it is not possible to represent this relationship 
with either a simple survival curve or single hazard ratio. An inspection of the parameter 
estimates from Table 13 does allow one to conclude that the AB 91 liD/restricted license 
treatment group has a lower odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI incident and that this trend in 
the odds or hazards tends to diminish over time. 
The presence of the statistically significant treatment by time interaction necessitates the use of 
the extended Cox regression model to correctly model and assess the association of treatment 
and a subsequent DUI incident during specific time intervals spanning the 365 days of the study. 
As was the case with the treatment by time interaction for the DUI conviction outcome, specific 
time intervals were constructed for the treatment by time interaction association with the DUI 
incident outcome in order to ensure similar standard errors and event/censored cases and to 
46 

--- p81
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
reflect the time-based provisions for first DUI offender license suspension, eligibility for license 
restriction, and the AB 91 pilot-related liD installations. 
Table 14 shows the time intervals and hazard ratios for the extended Cox regression model for 
the first DUI offender AB 91 liD/restricted license evaluation for days to first subsequent DUI 
incident. 
Table 14 
First DUI Offender AB 91 liD/Restricted License Evaluation, Time Intervals and Hazard Ratios 
for the Extended Cox Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent DUI Incident 
Treatment effect time interval 
Hazard ratio 
PValue 
0 to 182 days 
0.257 
263 .0142 
< .0001 
183 to 365 days 
0.549 
67.9934 
<.0001 
As the referent group in Table 14 is the AB 91 comparison group, the results indicate that during 
the first 182 days following their first DUI conviction, the AB 91 liD/restricted license group 
was associated with a 74% [(1-.257)*100] lower odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI incident. 
During days 183 to 365, the AB 91 liD/restricted group was associated with a 45% [(1­
.549)* 100] lower odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI incident. 
To summarize, the AB 91 liD/restricted license group of first DUI offenders has a lower odds or 
hazards of subsequent DUI incidents, and this trend tends to diminish over the 12-month study 
period. 
Days to first subsequent crash. Initial analyses identified the count of prior 3-year total crashes 
as the covariate for use in the final survival model assessing the relationship between treatment 
group and days to first subsequent crash over the 12-month period.21 
After identifying the total crash covariate, the next step involved determining whether the Cox 
proportional hazards assumption was violated with either total crashes or the treatment group 
variable. The initial, informal test involved constructing hazard plots for each variable and then 
checking the plots to determine whether the levels of either variable showed non-proportional 
21 The total crash covariate is a count of the total number of crashes on the DRM. These crashes may be reported by 
law enforcement agencies and/or drivers involved in the crashes. 
47 

--- p82
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
hazards over the course of the study. The plots for total crashes did not indicate an assumption 
violation. 
However, the plot associated with the treatment group displayed evidence of a 
possible proportional hazards violation. 
The more formal test consisting of plots of the 
difference between log negative log survival for each variable also indicated a potential violation 
associated with the treatment group variable. 
The final and formal test of the proportional hazards assumption consisted of computing the 
likely forms of statistical interaction between each predictor and days to first subsequent crash 
and testing the significance of the interactions. The results showed that although the prior 3-year 
total crashes covariate did not violate the proportional hazards assumption, the treatment group 
did and that this interaction was represented through a simple linear trend with time. Therefore, 
to incorporate the non-proportionality, the moderating relationship between treatment and days 
to first subsequent crash was included in the final Cox regression models. 
The first Cox outcome survival model included the overall effects associated with the prior 3­
year total crashes covariate, treatment group, and the treatment group by time interaction. The 
results are displayed in Table 15. 
Table 15 
First DUI Offender AB 91 liD/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent Crash 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
Prior 3-year total crashes 
0.2057 
PValue 
Hazard ratio 
38.7164 
< .0001 
1.228 
Treatment group 
-0.0928 
0.9116 
.3397 
0.0020 
19.1876 
< .0001 
Note. Likelihood Ratio Chi Square= 160.0508, p value< .0001 
Prior 3-year total crashes is statistically significant (p < .0001 ), indicating that remaining bias 
associated with this variable following creation of the propensity score matched sample has been 
removed from the subsequent crash outcome analyses. 
Table 15 also indicates that the treatment effect was not statistically significant (p = .3397). 
However, the treatment group by time interaction is statistically significant (p < .0001). 22 Due to 
22 For the reader interested in the statistical details of these terms, the treatment main effect in the interaction model 
refers to the difference between treatment and comparison group at the origin of the process. That the two groups do 
48 

--- p83
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
the presence of the treatment by time interaction, the model cannot be explained by a single 
hazard ratio or survival curve due to the hazard ratios varying by time. However, one can 
generally conclude from the parameter estimates in the table that the AB 91 liD/restricted license 
group is associated with higher odds or hazards of a subsequent crash and that this trend in the 
odds or hazards becomes greater over time. 
As was the case with the subsequent DUI conviction and DUI incident criteria results reported in 
the prior two sections, the existence of the time by treatment interaction necessitates the use of 
the extended Cox regression model to adequately explain in detail the relationship between the 
crash occurrence during the subsequent 12-month time period and the treatment versus 
comparison groups for the AB 91 liD/restricted license evaluation. 
Specific to the crash 
outcome, different time intervals than those identified for DUI conviction and DUI incident 
outcomes were constructed for the treatment by time interaction associated with the crash 
outcome in order to ensure similar standard errors and event/censored cases and to reflect the 
time-based provisions for first DUI offender post-conviction license suspension, and the AB 91 
pilot requirements to install an liD and to obtain a restricted license. 
Table 16 presents the time intervals and hazard ratios for the extended Cox survival regression 
model. 
Table 16 
First DUI Offender AB 91 liD/Restricted License Evaluation, Time Intervals and Hazard Ratios 
for the Extended Cox Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent Crash 
Treatment effect time interval 
Hazard ratio 
PValue 
0 to 99 days 
1.092 
0.8749 
.3496 
100 to 199 days 
1.568 
26.2197 
< .0001 
200 to 365 da s 
1.975 
95.4103 
<.0001 
The referent group for the extended Cox survival regression model in Table 16 is the AB 91 
comparison group. Therefore, the results indicate the following: 
not significantly differ in hazards at the early time intervals will be explicitly illustrated in the discussion associated 
with the following table. The interested reader is referred to Allison (l995) for a detailed discussion of parameter 
interpretation in Cox models containing time dependent covariates. 
49 

--- p84
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
• 
During the first 99 days following their first DUI conviction, first DUI offenders in the 
AB 91 liD/restricted license and the comparison groups do not significantly differ 
(p = .3496) in their odds or hazards for a subsequent crash. 23 
• 
During days 100 to 199 following their first DUI conviction, the AB 91 liD/restricted 
license group of first DUI offenders is associated with the odds or hazards of a 
subsequent crash that is approximately 1.57 times greater (56.8% higher) than the 
comparison group. This difference is statistically significant (p < .0001). 
• 
During days 200 to 365 following their first DUI conviction, the AB 91 liD/restricted 
license first DUI offender group is associated with the odds or hazards of a subsequent 
crash that is approximately 1.98 times greater (97.5% higher) than the comparison group. 
This difference is statistically significant (p < .0001). 
The results from the extended Cox survival regression analysis confirm those in Table 15 in that 
the AB 91 liD/restricted license treatment group has a higher odds or hazards of a subsequent 
crash after approximately 3 months, and that this trend increases over the 12-month study period. 
In summary, the results from the first DUI offender AB 91 liD/restricted license evaluation show 
that the liD/restricted license treatment group exhibits a statistically significant lower odds or 
hazards for a subsequent DUI conviction and DUI incident but that the trend tends to decrease 
over time. For subsequent crashes, the results show that the liD/restricted license treatment 
group exhibits a statistically significant higher odds or hazards than the comparison group and 
that this trend increases over time. 
Second DUI Offenders 
The second DUI offender AB 91 liD/restricted license evaluation assessed the association 
between the matched sample of 7,315 treatment group drivers and the 7,315 comparison group 
drivers identified in Table 1 on the three outcome measures. As stated in the Method section, the 
time period used for second DUI offenders was the subsequent 30 months. This time period was 
chosen to coincide with the post-conviction sanctions and liD/restricted license requirements 
associated with second DUI offenders. 
23 This validates the main effect parameter from Table 15 in that the groups did not differ at the origin of the process 
for approximately the subsequent 3 months. 
50 

--- p85
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Davs to first subsequent DUI conviction. The initial analyses identified both gender and prior 3­
year total convictions as the covariates for use in the final DUI conviction outcome models. 
After selecting the covariates, it was necessary to test for the presence of the proportional 
hazards assumption violation associated with gender and/or the prior 3-year total convictions 
covariates and the treatment group variable. The first test was informal and simply involved 
producing sample survival hazard plots for each variable to check the plots for visual evidence of 
a proportional hazards violation over the course of the 30-month study period. Neither covariate 
appeared to violate the assumption; however, a visual inspection of data indicated possible non­
proportionality associated with the treatment group hazard rates over time. 
A Cox regression analysis was conducted as the final and formal check of the proportionality 
assumption. This analysis tested the likely forms of the statistical interactions between each 
predictor and days to first subsequent DUI conviction. The results confirmed that there were no 
violations associated with the covariates; however, the analyses showed a statistically significant 
(p < .05) violation associated with the treatment group variable. 
The interaction between 
treatment and days to first subsequent DUI conviction was included in the final Cox survival 
regression models to correctly represent the non-proportionality in the hazards. 
Table 17 presents the first model assessing the overall association between days to first 
subsequent DUI conviction (in the 30 months after conviction) and gender, prior 3-year total 
convictions, treatment, and the treatment by time interaction. 
Table 17 
Second DUI Offender AB 91 liD/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent DUI Conviction 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
Gender 
-0.1744 
PValue 
Hazard ratio 
3.7931 
.0515 
0.840 
Prior 3-year total convictions 
0.1117 
25.3168 
< .0001 
1.118 
Treatment group 
1.3509 
85.8706 
< .0001 
0.0011 
15.0349 
.0001 
The entries in Table 17 show that the gender covariate is marginally significant (p = .0515) and 
that the prior 3-year total convictions variable is statistically significant (p < .0001). Together, 
51 

--- p86
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
these two covariates removed any remammg bias along these two multivariate dimensions 
following the formation of the propensity score matched treatment and comparison groups. 
Table 17 also indicates that the treatment group (p < .0001) and the treatment group by time 
interactions (p = .0001) are statistically significant. The presence of the interaction means that it 
is not possible to represent the relationship between treatment and a subsequent DUI conviction 
with a single hazard ratio or survival curve as the hazard ratios vary by time. However, one can 
conclude from an examination of the sign and magnitude of the parameter estimates from Table 
17 that the AB 91 liD/restricted license treatment group has a lower odds or hazards of 
subsequent DUI conviction and that this trend diminishes over time. 
To fully and adequately examine the relationship between the AB 91 liD/restricted license 
treatment and the DUI conviction outcome measure over time, an extended Cox regression 
model was constructed from the parameters in Table 17. 
As was the case in the prior 
applications of this statistical technique, the time intervals constructed and tested for statistical 
significance were selected to (1) provide a relatively equal number of events (occurrence of a 
subsequent DUI conviction during the subsequent 30-month study period) and censored 
observations (no subsequent DUI conviction in the same time period) across the time intervals to 
ensure that the standard errors are similar and (2) to reflect the temporal requirements of 
licensing sanctions, eligibility to obtain an liD-restricted license, and the AB 91 pilot specific 
liD installation provisions associated with the second DUI offenders. Table 18 displays the time 
intervals and hazard ratios for this extended Cox regression model. 
Table 18 
Second DUI Offender AB 91 liD/Restricted License Evaluation, Time Intervals and Hazard 
Ratios for the Extended Cox Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent DUI Conviction 
Treatment effect time interval 
Hazard ratio 
PValue 
0 to 364 days 
0.330 
93.8976 
< .0001 
365 to 730 days 
0.405 
55.4397 
< .0001 
uent 
0.825 
1.1045 
.2933 
The referent group for the extended Cox model in Table 18 is the AB 91 companson group. 
Therefore, the results are interpreted as follows: 
52 

--- p87
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
• 
During the first 364 days following their conviction for a second DUI offense, the AB 91 
liD/restricted license group is associated with a statistically significant (p < .0001) 67% 
[(1-.330)* 1 00] lower odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction. 
• 
During days 365 to 730 following their conviction for a second DUI offense, the AB 91 
liD/restricted license group is associated with a statistically significant (p < . 0001) 60% 
[(1-.405)* I 00) lower odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction. 
• 
During days 731 and subsequent following their conviction for a second DUI offense, the 
hazard ratio between the AB 91 liD/restricted license group and the comparison group is 
not statistically significant (p = .2933). 
The results from Table 18 confirm that the second DUI offender AB 91 liD/restricted license 
group has a lower odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction. 
However, this trend 
diminishes over time, and the difference between the treatment and comparison groups is no 
longer statistically significant after 730 days following the conviction of a second DUI offense. 
Davs to first subsequent DUI incident. Gender and prior 3-year total convictions were identified 
as the covariates for use in the final survival model assessing the relationship between the 
treatment group variable and days to first subsequent DUI incident over the 30-month time 
period. 
Examination of the sample survival and hazard plots indicated that there was a potential violation 
of the proportional hazards assumption associated with the treatment variable. 
The Cox 
regression model formally testing for the covariates and treatment by time interactions indicated 
that while there was no violation associated with the covariates, there was a significant (p < .05) 
violation associated with treatment. 
With the existence of the significant time by treatment interaction, the final Cox model entered 
the gender and prior 3-year total convictions covariates first, and then the treatment and 
treatment by time interaction terms. Table 19 shows the results from this analysis. 
53 

--- p88
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Table 19 
Second DUI Offender AB 91 liD/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent DUI Incident 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
Gender 
-0.1868 
P Value 
Hazard ratio 
5.6193 
.0178 
0.830 
Prior 3-year total convictions 
0.1155 
35.1477 
< .0001 
1.122 
Treatment group 
1.4282 
121.0799 
< .0001 
0.0012 
21.7996 
< .0001 
Note. Likelihood Ratio Chi Square= 273.6750, p value= .0001 
Table 19 shows that the gender and prior 3-year total convictions covariates are statistically 
significant (p = .0178 and p < .0001 , respectively). 
The reader will also note from Table 19 that the treatment group effect (p < .0001) and the 
treatment group by time interaction effect (p < .0001) are statistically significant. Therefore, the 
model cannot be represented by a single hazard ratio or survival curve due to the hazard ratios 
varying by time. One can generally conclude from the parameter estimates in the table that the 
second DUI offender AB 91 liD/restricted license treatment group has a lower odds or hazards 
ofa subsequent DUI incident and that this trend diminishes over time. 
As was the case with the prior DUI conviction criterion measure, an extended Cox regression 
model was constructed to fully examine the nature of the relationship between treatment and the 
DUI incident criterion over time. Table 20 displays the time-dependent hazard ratios and related 
significance tests from this extended Cox model. 
Table 20 
Second DUI Offender AB 91 liD/Restricted License Evaluation, Time Intervals and Hazard 
Ratios for the Extended Cox Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent DUI Incident 
54 
Treatment effect time interval 
Hazard ratio 
PValue 
0 to 364 days 
0.305 
138.0654 
<.0001 
365 to 730 days 
0.418 
71.1442 
< .0001 
731 days and subse uent 
0.818 
1.3119 
.2520 

--- p89
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
The referent group for Table 20 is the AB 91 comparison group. The results are to be interpreted 
as follows: 
• 
During the first 364 days following their conviction for a second DUI offense, the AB 91 
liD/restricted license group is associated with a statistically significant (p < .0001) 70% 
[(1-.305)* 1 00] lower odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI incident. 
• 
During days 365 to 730 following their conviction for a second DUI offense, the AB 91 
liD/restricted license group is associated with a statistically significant (p < .0001) 58% 
[(1-.418)* 1 00] lower odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI incident. 
• 
During days 731 and subsequent following their conviction for a second DUI offense, the 
hazard ratio between the AB 91 liD/restricted license group and the comparison group is 
not statistically significant (p = .2520). 
In summary, the results from Table 20 confirm the interpretation of the parameter estimates from 
Table 19 in that the second DUI offender AB 91 liD/restricted license group has a lower odds or 
hazards of a subsequent DUI incident when compared to the second DUI offenders in the 
comparison group for this evaluation. 
This trend diminishes over time, and the difference 
between the treatment and comparison groups is no longer statistically significant after 730 days 
following the second DUI offense conviction. 
Days to first subsequent crash. The initial analyses identified prior 3-year total convictions and 
prior 3-year total crashes as the covariates for use in the final survival model assessing the 
relationship between the treatment group variable and days to first subsequent crash over the 
period of 30 months. 
A visual inspection of the sample survival and hazard plots implied that there was a potential 
violation of the proportional hazards assumption associated with the treatment variable. To 
formally test for the assumption violation, a Cox regression model with the covariates and 
treatment by time interactions was fit. The results from the model indicated that there was no 
assumption violation present among the covariates but that there was a violation of the 
proportional hazards assumption associated with the treatment group predictor. 
55 

--- p90
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
The final Cox model for assessing the crash criterion entered, during the first step, the two 
covariates. 
The second step involved entering the treatment and the treatment by time 
interaction term to account for the time-varying hazard ratios. The results from this analysis are 
presented in Table 21. 
Table 21 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
Prior 3-year total convictions 
0.1078 
PValue 
Hazard ratio 
23.1940 
< .0001 
1.114 
Prior 3-year total crashes 
0.2114 
19.5299 
< .0001 
1.235 
Treatment group 
-0.0824 
0.3437 
.5577 
0.0007 
6.7840 
.0092 
Second DUI Offender AB 91 liD/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox Regression Model, 
Days to First Subsequent Crash 
As shown in Table 21 , the prior 3-year total convictions and prior 3-year total crashes covariates 
are statistically significant (both with p values < .0001 ). 
Table 21 also indicates that the treatment group effect (at the origin of the process) is not 
statistically significant (p = .5577). However, the treatment group by time interaction effect is 
statistically significant (p = .0092). Due to the presence of the treatment by time interaction, the 
model cannot be represented by a single hazard ratio or survival curve due to the hazard ratios 
varying by time. However, one can generally conclude from the parameter estimates in the table 
that the second DUI offender AB 91 liD/restricted license group is associated with higher odds 
or hazards of a subsequent crash and that this trend becomes greater over time. 
Similar to the protocol for the DUI conviction and DUI incident analyses, an extended Cox 
regression model was constructed to thoroughly examine the structure of the relationship 
between treatment group and the crash criterion over time. Table 22 displays the time-dependent 
hazard ratios and related significance tests from this regression model. 
56 

--- p91
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Table 22 
Second DUI Offender AB 91 liD/Restricted License Evaluation, Time Intervals and Hazard 
Ratios for the Extended Cox Regression Model, Days to First Subsequent Crash 
Treatment effect time interval 
Hazard ratio 
P Value 
0 to 299 days 
1.174 
1.8376 
.1752 
300 to 730 days 
1.577 
20.6119 
<.0001 
731 days and subsequent 
2.164 
17.9084 
< .0001 
The referent group for the extended Cox survival regression model in Table 22 is the AB 91 
comparison group. Therefore, the results indicate the following: 
• 
During the first 299 days following their second DUI conviction, there is no statistically 
significant (p = .1752) difference between the AB 91 liD/restricted license group and the 
comparison group on the odds or hazards of a subsequent crash. 
• 
During the period from day 300 to day 730, the AB 91 liD/restricted license group is 
associated with a subsequent crash odds or hazards that is approximately 1.58 times 
greater (58% higher) than the comparison group. This difference is statistically 
significant (p < .0001). 
• 
During the period from day 731 and subsequent following their second DUI conviction, 
the AB 91 liD/restricted license group is associated with a subsequent crash odds or 
hazards that is approximately 2.16 times greater (116% higher) than the comparison 
group. This difference is statistically significant (p < .0001). 
The results from this analysis confirm those in Table 21 in that the AB 91 liD/restricted group 
has a higher odds or hazards of a subsequent crash and that this trend increases over the 30­
month study period. 
In summary, the results from the second DUI offender AB 91 liD/restricted license evaluation 
show that the liD/restricted license treatment group exhibits a statistically significant lower odds 
or hazards for a subsequent DUI conviction and DUI incident, but that these trends decrease over 
time. In terms of a subsequent crash, the results show that the liD/restricted license treatment 
57 

--- p92
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
group has a statistically significant higher odds or hazards than the comparison group and that 
this trend increases over time. 
Third and Subsequent DUI Offenders 
The third and subsequent DUI offender AB 91 liD/restricted license evaluation assessed the 
association between the matched sample of 1,100 treatment group drivers and the 1,100 
comparison group drivers identified in Table 1 on the three outcome measures. As stated in the 
Method section, the time period used for third and subsequent DUI offenders was the subsequent 
42 months. This time period was chosen to coincide with the post-conviction sanctions and 
liD/restricted license requirements associated with third and subsequent DUI offenders. 
Davs to first subsequent DUI conviction. The initial analyses indicated that no covariate was 
necessary for inclusion in the final outcome model. 
In other words, the propensity score 
matching process was successful in removing bias between the treatment/comparison groups on 
the measured factors. 
In addition, no violation of the proportional hazards assumption was 
detected. 
The final Cox proportional hazards model thus contained only the treatment group variable. The 
results are displayed in Table 23. 
Table 23 
Third and Subsequent DUI Offender AB 91 liD/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox Regression 
Model, Days to First Subsequent DUI Conviction 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
PValue 
Hazard ratio 
40.0582 
< .0001 
3.398 
Note. Likelihood Ratio Chi Square = 47.510l,p value = .0001 
The results from the table indicate that the comparison group subjects have a significantly 
(p < .0001) higher odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction than do the treatment group 
subjects. Specifically, the hazard ratio in Table 23 means that the comparison group subjects 
have an odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction that is approximately 3.4 times higher 
than that associated with the treatment group. 
This difference is graphically illustrated in 
Figure 10. 
58 

--- p93
...... = 
<l) 
::l 
0"' 
<l) 
Ul 
.£::! 
::l 
Ul 
0 = = 
...c .s 
............
·-
(.)
~ ·:; 
Ul = 
..... 
<l) 
0 
(.)
;;. .......
·;:::; 
-o ~ 
'-+-< Ci 
0 = 
0 "€ 
0 
0.. 
2 
0-. 
1.00 
0.99 
0.98 
0.97 
0.96 
0.95 
0.94 
0.93 
0.92 
0.91 
0.90 
0.89 
0.88 
0.87 
0.86 
0.85 
0 
--.-.....,.. 
S&R comparison drivers 
................... _.... ......... _.... 
liD/restricted license drivers 
............. _... ----.. -....... _ ---- ...... -- ........ __ 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
1000 
1100 
1200 
1300 
Days to first subsequent DUI conviction 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Figure 10. Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent DUI conviction for third 
and subsequent DUI offenders in the treatment vs. comparison groups for the AB 91 
liD/restricted license evaluation. 
The higher line in Figure 10 represents the survival rate of a subsequent DUI conviction for the 
AB 91 liD/restricted license group; the lower line is the rate associated with the comparison 
group offenders. This figure pictorially confirms the results of the statistical analysis presented 
in Table 23. 
Davs to first DUI incident. Results from the initial analyses indicated that there was no need to 
include any covariates in the final outcome equations. Therefore, the propensity score process 
was successful in removing bias between the treatment/comparison groups on the measured 
factors. The diagnostic analyses also indicated that there was no violation of the proportional 
hazards assumption. 
The final Cox proportional hazards model containing the treatment group variable is presented in 
Table 24. 
59 

--- p94
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Table 24 
Third and Subsequent DUI Offender AB 91 liD/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox Regression 
Model, Days to First Subsequent DUI Incident 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
P Value 
Hazard ratio 
Treatment grou 
1.2289 
54.2021 
<.0001 
3.417 
Note. Likelihood Ratio Chi Square= 64.2348,p value= .0001 
The model parameters from the table show that the comparison group subjects have a 
significantly (p <.0001) higher odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI incident than do the 
treatment group subjects. That is, similar to results from the DUI conviction outcome model, the 
hazard ratio in Table 24 means that the comparison group subjects have an odds or hazards of a 
subsequent DUI incident approximately 3.4 times higher than that associated with the AB 91 
liD/restricted group. This difference is illustrated in Figure 11. 
1.00 - ....... ,__, 
S&R comparison drivers 
0.99 
--...... ............ 
.... _'- ..... ... _ 
___ 
liD/restricted license drivers 
0.98 
..... __ 
---.. _ 
0.97 
..... ____ """"" 
0.96 
-- ..... --...... -
0 
0.95 
=......
-= = 
il) 
0.94 
...... 
·- '"0
~ ';:) 
0.93 
~;.:; 0.92 
.::: ~ 0 91
-a Q 
. 
'b 
0.90 
§ 
0.89 
'€ 
0.88 
02 
0.87 
~ 
0.86 
0.85~~~~~~~,_~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
1000 
1100 
1200 
1300 
Days to first subsequent DUI incident 
Figure 11. Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent DUI incident for third and 
subsequent DUI offenders in the treatment vs. comparison groups for the AB 91 liD/restricted 
license evaluation. 
60 

--- p95
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
The higher line in Figure 11 represents the survival rate of a subsequent DUI conviction for the 
AB 91 liD/restricted license group. The lower line is the rate associated with the comparison 
group drivers. 
The figure shows that the AB 91 liD/restricted license group has a lower 
subsequent odds or hazards (greater survival) of a DUI incident. The curves in the figure 
confirm results of the statistical analysis presented in Table 24. 
Davs to first subsequent crash. Initial analyses indicated that the propensity score process was 
successful in removing bias between the treatment/comparison groups on the measured factors. 
Therefore, no covariate adjustment was necessary in the final outcome mode. The diagnostic 
analyses also indicated that the proportional hazards assumption was met. 
Table 25 presents the results of the final Cox proportional hazards model. 
Table 25 
Third and Subsequent DUI Offender AB 91 liD/Restricted License Evaluation, Cox Regression 
Model, Days to First Subsequent Crash 
Parameter 
Variable 
estimate 
PValue 
Hazard ratio 
Treatment grou 
-0.3953 
4.556 
.0328 
0.673 
Note. Likelihood Ratio Chi Square= 4.6423, p value= 0.0312 
The negative parameter estimate and associated hazard ratio < 1.0 indicate that the third and 
subsequent DUI offenders in the comparison group have a significantly (p = .0328) lower odds 
or hazards of a subsequent crash than those in the AB 91 liD/restricted license group. 
Specifically, the hazard ratio in Table 25 indicates that the comparison group has an odds or 
hazards of a subsequent crash approximately 33% [(1-.673)* 100] less than that of the AB 91 
liD/restricted license group. The difference between the two groups is pictorially presented in 
Figure 12. 
61 

--- p96
--
,..s:::: 
1.00 
e<j "' 
;.... 
0 
= 
...... 
0.99 
(!) 
;::l 
(!) 
0" 0.98 
,£)"' 
;::l 
"' 
0 
0.97 
= 
,..s:::: 
...... 
-~ 0.96 
;.... "' 
(!) > 0.95
·;:::: 
"0 
4-< 
0 
0.94
= 
0 
"€ 
0 
0.93
0.. 
0;.... 
A. 
0.92 
S&R comparison drivers 
.... 
liD/restricted license drivers 
.... ....... ....... ...... ''- .....,_ 
... ... ...... ,_ .... --... ......._ -- ...__.._ 
... '... - ... _.. 
.. 
,,_- .._ 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
1000 1100 1200 1300 
Days to first subsequent crash 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Figure 12. 
Final survival model: Number of days to first subsequent crash for third and 
subsequent DUI offenders in the treatment vs. comparison groups for the AB 91 liD/restricted 
license evaluation. 
The higher line in Figure 12 represents the survival rate of a subsequent crash in the 42-month 
follow-up period for the comparison group, while the lower line is the subsequent survival rate 
associated with the AB 91 liD/restricted license group. The figure illustrates that third and 
subsequent DUI offenders in the comparison group have a lower odds or hazards (greater 
survival) of a subsequent crash than do the same type of DUI offenders in the AB 91 
liD/restricted license group. The figure confirms the results of the statistical analysis presented 
in Table 25. 
To summanze, the analyses associated with the third and subsequent DUI offender AB 91 
liD/restricted license evaluation show that the treatment group drivers have a significantly lower 
odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction and DUI incident over the 42-month time 
period. However, the comparison group has a significantly lower odds or hazards of a subsequent 
crash during the same time period. 
62 

--- p97
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
DISCUSSION 
Study Limitations 
Before discussing the study’s results and offering recommendations, it is informative to consider 
the data and statistical limitations present in the analyses.   
In this study, like in many other evaluation program studies, it was not possible to randomly 
assign study subjects to the AB 91 pilot program treatment and comparison groups. That is, there 
was no mechanism to randomly assign DUI offenders within the four counties to the AB 91 
program or comparison group interventions. Therefore, potential biases due to preexisting 
differences were statistically controlled to the extent possible by matching treatment and 
comparison group subjects based on a propensity score matching technique and by using prior 
driving record data and demographic variables as covariates in the analyses. It should be noted 
that while the propensity score and covariate adjustment techniques utilized in the present study 
statistically equated the DUI offender groups for each evaluation on dimensions measured by the 
covariates, there are limits to the effectiveness of such statistical controls. The most substantial 
limitation is that in quasi-experimental designs of the kind used in the present study, it is 
inherently difficult to capture and measure all of the factors on which groups differ and which 
would impact their subsequent outcome on DUI convictions, DUI incidents, and crashes. 
Although strong statistical adjustments were employed to control potential bias between the 
offender groups, there remains the possibility that uncontrolled bias operated to affect study 
results. However, for such a bias to threaten the validity of the results reported in the present 
study, one would have to empirically identify for the study data an unmeasured variable(s) that 
would account for the relationship between treatment/comparison group assignment and the 
outcome measures completely unrelated to the variables used to create the propensity score 
matched samples and used in the covariate adjustment – an unlikely scenario. Therefore, due to 
the quasi-experimental nature of this study, the results do not prove a positive or negative causal 
impact of the AB 91 pilot program. Instead, they illustrate relationships between the AB 91 pilot 
and subsequent DUI convictions, DUI incidents, and crashes that are suggestive of its effect on 
traffic safety. 
In addition, the four counties where the AB 91 pilot program was implemented were not 
randomly selected to be similar to all statewide counties. Instead, the AB 91 pilot program was 
implemented in four counties (Alameda, Los Angeles, Sacramento, and Tulare) which might not 
63 

--- p98
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
necessarily be representative of the entire State of California in terms of the population of DUI 
offenders in those counties, their individual characteristics, the traffic environment, and county-
or municipal-level characteristics. It is, for example, possible that there was a geographical bias 
in the study or that there were differences between DUI offenders from AB 91 pilot counties and 
those from non-pilot counties in their characteristics related to DUI recidivism and crash 
involvement. Therefore, it is uncertain to what extent the study results can generalize to all 
counties and drivers throughout California. However, this potential bias is mitigated by the fact 
that the demographic and driver record indices associated with the DUI offender groups in the 
AB 91 pilot counties are similar to statewide indices reported for DUI offender groups in the 
Department’s DUI MIS report (Oulad Daoud et al., 2015).  
The lack of randomization at both the county and individual level that is described in the above 
paragraphs negated the use of any statistical techniques to estimate the number of crashes and 
DUI convictions and incidents prevented, caused, and/or attributed to the AB 91 program. 
Therefore, any attempt to extrapolate beyond the relative risk measures (i.e., odds and hazards 
ratios) presented in this report with an attempt to estimate the number of such crashes and DUI 
convictions and incidents both statewide and within the AB 91 pilot counties would be 
inappropriate and would produce both erroneous and misleading results. 
Summary of Findings 
Table 26 summarizes the main study findings for both the AB 91 program and the AB 91 
IID/restricted license evaluations presented for each DUI offender group and for each outcome 
measure. 
As shown in the table, the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation results indicate that the occurrence of 
a subsequent DUI conviction or DUI incident among first DUI offenders in the pilot counties is 
not different from the occurrence of a subsequent DUI conviction or DUI incident among the 
same offenders in non-pilot counties. However, first DUI offenders from AB 91 pilot counties 
have statistically significant higher crash risk than those in non-pilot counties, and the difference 
in crash risk between the two groups is consistent over time. 
64 

--- p99
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Table 26 
Summary of Study Findings 
AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation 
AB 91 IID/restricted license evaluation 
DUI offender group 
DUI offender group 
Outcome 
1st 
2nd 
3rd and subsequent 
1st 
2nd 
3rd and subsequent 
DUI convictions 
No statistical 
Statistically 
No statistical 
Statistically 
Statistically 
Statistically 
difference 
significant, 
difference 
significant, 
significant, 
significant, 
lower risk 
lower risk 
lower risk 
lower risk 
associated with 
associated with 
associated with 
associated with 
comparison group, 
treatment group, 
treatment group, 
treatment group, 
difference consistent 
difference decreases 
difference decreases 
difference consistent 
over time 
over time 
over time 
over time 
DUI incidents 
No statistical 
Statistically 
Statistically 
Statistically 
Statistically 
Statistically 
difference 
significant, 
significant, 
significant, 
significant, 
significant, 
lower risk 
lower risk 
lower risk 
lower risk 
lower risk 
associated with 
associated with 
associated with 
associated with 
associated with 
comparison group, 
comparison group, 
treatment group, 
treatment group, 
treatment group, 
difference consistent 
difference consistent 
difference decreases 
difference decreases 
difference consistent 
over time 
over time 
over time 
over time 
over time 
Crashes 
Statistically 
No statistical 
No statistical 
Statistically 
Statistically 
Statistically 
significant, 
difference 
difference 
significant, 
significant, 
significant, 
lower risk 
lower risk 
lower risk 
lower risk 
associated with 
associated with 
associated with 
associated with 
comparison group, 
comparison group, 
comparison group, 
comparison group, 
difference consistent 
difference increases 
difference increases 
difference consistent 
over time 
over time 
over time 
over time 
 
65 

--- p100
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
For second DUI offenders, the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation findings show that offenders in 
the non-pilot counties have a lower risk of a subsequent DUI conviction or DUI incident than 
offenders in the the AB 91 pilot counties. This difference among the two groups is consistent 
over time. In addition, there are no differences in the risk of a subsequent crash for second DUI 
offenders in the pilot counties versus those in the non-pilot counties.  
There are no differences between third and subsequent DUI offenders from AB 91 pilot counties 
and those from non-pilot counties in their risk of a subsequent DUI conviction and crash 
involvement based on the AB 91 intent-to-treat evaluation results. Still, the AB 91 pilot program 
is negatively associated with the risk of a subsequent DUI incident among third and subsequent 
DUI offenders. Specifically, the third and subsequent DUI offenders from non-pilot counties 
have a lower risk of a subsequent DUI incident than the third and subsequent DUI offenders 
from the pilot counties, and this difference is consistent over time. 
According to the results from the AB 91 IID/restricted license evaluation, all three DUI offender 
groups (first, second, and third and subsequent) whose qualifying DUI offense occurred in one of 
the pilot counties, and who obtained an IID-restricted license satisfying all AB 91 pilot program 
restriction/reinstatement requirements, have lower DUI recidivism risk than their matched DUI 
offender comparison groups consisting of offenders that remained suspended or revoked during 
the study time period. First and second DUI offender groups with an AB 91 IID-
restricted/reinstated driver license have lower risk of a subsequent DUI conviction and DUI 
incident than their corresponding groups of suspended DUI offenders. However, the lower DUI 
recidivism risk associated with both IID-restricted first and second DUI offender groups 
decreases over time. Specifically, the results suggest that during the period in which DUI 
offenders likely become eligible for IID device removal from their vehicle, the difference 
between the first and second DUI offender IID-restricted and suspended comparison groups on 
the odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction/incident begin to diminish. 
Most 
noteworthy is the finding that by the end of the study period, these differences continue to 
diminish among first DUI offenders and are not statistically significant among second DUI 
offenders. 
The AB 91 IID/restricted license evaluation results for the subsequent crash outcomes indicate 
findings opposite to those for the subsequent DUI conviction/incident for all three DUI offender 
groups. That is, the first, second, and third and subsequent DUI offender groups with an AB 91 
IID-restricted/reinstated driver license have a higher subsequent crash risk than their matched 
groups of suspended/revoked drivers. While this difference in the crash risk between IID­
66 

--- p101
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
restricted and suspended/revoked comparison groups remains constant among third and 
subsequent DUI offenders, it increases over time among first and second DUI offender groups. 
More importantly, the extended Cox regression interaction models in relation to the crash 
criterion show that for first and second offenders, during the period in which both the treatment 
and comparison groups are likely under a license suspension/revocation, the odds or hazards of 
crashing do not significantly differ. However, when the treatment group becomes eligible to 
receive an IID-restricted license, the treatment group begins to crash at a quicker rate. The 
associated odds or hazards of a crash continue to increase over time relative to the comparison 
group who remain on a suspended/revoked license.  
Conclusion 
The findings of the specific deterrence evaluation of the AB 91 pilot program indicated that there 
were either no differences in subsequent DUI recidivism and crash involvement of DUI 
offenders in the AB 91 pilot counties relative to those in the non-pilot counties or that some 
groups of DUI offenders from non-pilot counties have lower risk of a subsequent DUI recidivism 
and crash involvement relative to those in the pilot counties. Further, the findings of the current 
study show that IIDs can be associated with reduced subsequent DUI recidivism among specific 
DUI offender groups, but with a substantial increase in subsequent crashes among DUI offenders 
who installed an IID relative to suspended or revoked DUI offenders. It bears emphasizing that 
the current study found a strong and reliable association between possession of an AB 91 IID-
restricted license and reduced DUI recidivism. Across all DUI offender levels, those with an IID-
restricted license have lower odds or hazards of a subsequent DUI conviction, and lower odds or 
hazards of a subsequent DUI incident when compared to drivers with suspended or revoked 
licenses. For first DUI offenders these differences tend to diminish with time. 
For second 
offenders these differences disappear after approximately 2 years. For third and subsequent DUI 
offenders the difference in subsequent DUI recidivism did not diminish over the 42-month 
follow-up period. 
These study findings are generally consistent with those reported by DeYoung et al. (2005) and 
with other prior Departmental research showing driver license suspensions and revocations to be 
the most effective available countermeasure in reducing crash involvement (Gebers, 2009; 
Hagen, 1977; Rogers, 1995, 1997; Tashima & Marelich, 1989; Tashima & Peck, 1986). 
The DeYoung et al. (2005) study and the current study used similar methodological and 
analytical techniques and obtained comparable results. However, the current study is more 
67 

--- p102
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
comprehensive, and its findings are unique in regards to the effectiveness of IID programs 
among current California DUI offenders. For example, the 2005 study only evaluated the effect 
of an IID court order or restriction among first DUI offenders with elevated BAC levels and 
found no association between an IID court order and reductions in subsequent DUI recidivism 
and crashes. The current study involved all first DUI offenders and provided additional evidence 
about the potential effects of IID-restricted licenses among first DUI offenders. Thus, although 
the 2005 study indicated little or no effect of an IID court order or restriction among first DUI 
offenders, the current study found a reliable association between possession of an AB 91 IID-
restricted license and reduced DUI recidivism among first DUI offenders. Furthermore, the 
current study results supported the 2005 study findings that IIDs are associated with reduced 
DUI recidivism among second DUI offenders. While the 2005 study only found significantly 
lower DUI recidivism when the occurrence of subsequent DUI incidents was used as the 
outcome measure, the current study found lower DUI recidivism among AB 91 IID-restricted 
second DUI offenders for both DUI recidivism outcome measures (subsequent DUI convictions 
and DUI incidents). Similar findings were reported for the third and subsequent DUI offender 
AB 91 IID/restricted license evaluation, which was not an evaluation component of the 2005 
study. However, the positive association between the AB 91 IID-restricted license and lower 
DUI recidivism decreases over time and eventually reveals no reliable (statistically significant) 
difference among second DUI offenders. 
The positive associations between the AB 91 IID-restricted license and lower DUI recidivism 
among all DUI offender groups and its diminishing effects over time for some DUI offenders 
found in the current study agree with overall findings from other research studies focused on the 
effectiveness of IIDs. Specifically, other studies have also found that first and repeat DUI 
offenders with IIDs installed in their vehicles have substantially lower DUI recidivism rates than 
corresponding DUI offender groups whose driver licenses are suspended. Similar to the current 
study findings, this positive effect vanishes once IIDs are removed from the offenders’ vehicles 
(Elder et al., 2011; Roth, Voas, & Marques, 2007). Comparable results were reported by Voas et 
al. (2013) when DUI offenders installed interlock devices through both optional IID programs 
and mandatory IID programs, some of which, like the AB 91 pilot program, use the IID 
installment as a condition for full license reinstatement. However, because the overall structure 
and implementation specifics of IID programs vary among states, it is problematic to generalize 
the findings on the effectiveness of an IID program from state to state. 
Most research studies on IID programs focus on DUI recidivism as the sole measure of the 
program effectiveness. The common rationale for not using crashes is that crashes are rare events 
68 

--- p103
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
and not easy to use as an outcome measure in evaluation studies. Occasionally, researchers use 
specific surrogate measures for alcohol-related crashes such as single-vehicle late-night crashes 
(interestingly, an even more rare event than the number of total reported crashes, a fact that 
seems to be ignored by researchers using this criterion). For example, a recent evaluation of 
Washington State’s 2003 and 2004 IID laws affecting first DUI offenders (McCartt et al., 2013) 
used single-vehicle late-night crash risk as a surrogate measure for alcohol-related crashes and 
found a modest but significant 8% reduction in single-vehicle late-night crash risk associated 
with one of the two Washington IID laws. 
One of the main contributions of the current study is that this IID pilot program evaluation, in 
addition to DUI recidivism, used crashes as the outcome measure.24 The necessity of using the 
crash outcome measure in IID evaluations is acknowledged in peer reviewed literature (Voas & 
Lacey, 2011). A smaller number of studies that used crashes as the outcome measure evaluating 
IID program effectiveness reported that drivers who participated in IID program had increased 
overall crash risk relative to drivers with a suspended license (Elder et al., 2011). Similar 
findings are reported in the study by DeYoung et al. (2005), which is often cited as one of the 
few studies where crashes were used as the outcome measure. 
Both the current and the 2005 studies reported a negative association between IID-restricted 
license and subsequent crash involvement among second DUI offenders. That is, a higher crash 
risk was evident among second DUI offenders who obtained an IID-restricted license. In 
addition, the current study found the same results for all DUI offender groups (first, second, third 
and subsequent). Even more problematic is the finding that for the first and second DUI 
offenders the higher crash risk associated with the IID-restricted drivers increases over time 
relative to those with suspended license. 
Therefore, although the AB 91 IID program is 
associated with significant reduction in DUI recidivism among all IID-restricted DUI offender 
groups, the program is also associated with increase in crash involvement among all DUI 
offenders that are subject to the program and those who obtained an IID-restricted license. This 
is particularly problematic since a substantial proportion of these crashes are those involving 
injuries and/or fatalities (of the overall crash involvement measured in the study, the proportion 
of fatal/injury crashes ranged from mid-30% to low-40% for different DUI offender groups). 
24 While the present study appropriately focused on total reported crashes, all analyses conducted during the dataset 
creation and screening processes and the preliminary analyses were consistent in that when significant differences 
occurred on total crashes, the effects were pervasive across crash severity and sub-types as well (e.g., fatal/injury, 
HBD, responsible). Such consistency is expected when, as reported in the prior sections, the treatment/comparison 
groups are well balanced and equivalent prior to conducting the outcome analyses and when no reporting bias on 
casualty crashes is present between groups. 
69 

--- p104
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
The crash outcome findings of the current study are of primary importance since traffic crashes 
and costs associated with the resulting injuries, fatalities, and property damage are a direct and 
decisive measure of the traffic safety effects of a given program. As noted by Janke and Peck 
(1991) “only the accident measure has the potential for substantiating the traffic safety value of 
a program or determining the accident propensity of a driver group”. The authors continued to 
emphasize that when “evaluating effects of programs on traffic safety from a public health 
perspective, there is simply no viable substitute for this measure” (p.13). Consequently, given 
that the AB 91 pilot program is associated with an increase in crash risk among DUI offenders 
who complied with AB 91 program requirements and obtained an IID-restricted license when 
compared to drivers with a suspended or revoked license, the traffic safety benefits of this 
program are potentially marginalized by the greater safety toll of an increased propensity for 
traffic crash involvement. 
McCartt et al. (2013) argued that focusing on DUI recidivism as the outcome measure is 
justified. The authors relied on a finding by Fell (1993; as cited in McCartt et al., 2013) which 
indicated that drivers with prior convictions for alcohol-impaired driving are overrepresented in 
fatal crashes. Therefore, McCartt concluded, reducing recidivism among those “convicted of 
alcohol-impaired driving could potentially reduce alcohol-related fatalities.” 
While this 
assumption seems plausible, it is critical not to ignore a potential risk associated with drivers 
who do not have prior convictions for alcohol-impaired driving. Specifically, most alcohol- and 
drug-involved drivers in fatal crashes in California do not have prior DUI convictions on their 
driver record (Oulad Daoud et al., 2015). Therefore, going beyond DUI recidivism and, first and 
foremost, including crashes as a direct measure of the traffic safety effects of a given IID 
program undoubtedly, strengthens an evaluation of such programs in determining whether they 
can be associated with a lower risk of crashes and ultimately with reduced fatalities and/or 
injuries. 
The analytical approach taken in this study rests in part on a basic assumption that the state's 
interest in reducing the number of DUI incidents ultimately derives from the demonstrated fact 
that impaired driving is intimately tied to a huge toll in economic costs and human suffering. In 
short, any hoped-for reduction in the number of DUI incidents is assumed to be a means to an 
end—the preservation of life and health among the users of our roads—and never exactly an end 
in itself. Similarly, any hoped-for reduction in DUI recidivism is assumed to be a means to 
reduce the public-health threat impaired drivers pose to themselves and others in terms of traffic 
crash involvement. 
70 

--- p105
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Due to the quasi-experimental nature of this evaluation that was necessitated for this evaluation 
of the AB 91 IID pilot program, it cannot be scientifically predicted what the expected reduction 
in DUI recidivism (2nd, 3rd, etc., DUI convictions and DUI incidents) would be more broadly 
implemented. That number is certainly greater than zero, and could be in the thousands. By the 
same token, it also cannot be precisely predicted what the expected increase in crashes, including 
fatal/injury crashes, would be were this AB 91 IID pilot program to be with a broader 
implementation.  That number is certainly greater than zero, and could be in the hundreds.  
Consistent with the recommendations from DeYoung et al. (2005), the IID requirement should 
continue to be evaluated as a potential DUI countermeasure in California. For example, driver 
license suspension or revocation actions could be combined with IID requirements, as these two 
countermeasures may help reduce alcohol-related incidents in different ways. The effectiveness 
of driver license suspension has been documented in numerous prior California studies since the 
late 1970s both as an overall traffic safety countermeasure and as, most relevant in this context, a 
DUI countermeasure (Hagen, 1977; Tashima & Peck, 1986; Tashima & Marelich, 1989; Rogers, 
1995, 1997; Gebers, 2009). 
The importance of sustained use of hard license suspension or revocation actions as a DUI 
countermeasure is particularly relevant in regards to APS suspension or revocation actions. 
Namely, prior research has shown that APS license suspensions or revocations have statistically 
significant and substantially important effects in reducing alcohol-related fatal crash involvement 
(Wagenaar & Maldonado-Molina, 2007; Rogers, 1995, 1997). 
In her two studies, Rogers has 
shown that California's APS law from 1990 have both general (1995) and specific (1997) 
deterrent effects. 
Specifically, because of their swiftness and certainty of punishment 
(immediately upon DUI arrest), APS suspension and revocation actions are very well in sync 
with the main deterrence theory postulates (Ross, 1982) and continued requirement for hard 
license suspension or revocation for a pre-specified minimum time period, as prescribed under 
California's APS law, should be preserved. 
Overall, driver license actions should continue to be an integral part of the DUI countermeasure 
system in California. As Helander (2002) noted in the past legislatively-mandated review of 
scientific evidence on effective DUI countermeasures, driver license suspensions are among the 
most proven-effective DUI countermeasures whose integrity should be maintained. He further 
argued that new DUI laws and programs should “not diminish or work at cross-purposes to laws 
and programs that are effective . . .” (p. 27) as are license suspension/revocation actions. 
DeYoung (2013) also reasoned that, in addition to being effective traffic safety countermeasures, 
71 

--- p106
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
driver license suspension and revocation actions are inexpensive and relatively easy to 
administer. 
The results presented in the current study support the observation by DeYoung (2013) as to why 
mitigating the overall traffic risk of DUI offenders through a significant period of hard license 
suspension is an appropriate system goal. DeYoung offered two such reasons.  He stated: 
The first is that license suspension fits the crime; the system responds to the irresponsible 
combination of driving and drinking that threatens the safety of other road users by 
removing the driving privilege. The second reason is that the bottom line in traffic safety 
is to reduce motor vehicle crashes, which take a huge societal toll in economic costs and 
human suffering; reducing their incidence should be a high priority and license 
suspension does this. Finally, a substantial proportion of DUI offenders are risky not just 
because they drink and drive, but also because they are problem drivers regardless of 
whether they have been drinking.  (DeYoung, 2013, p. 50) 
For example, using the multivariate statistical technique of cluster analysis, a California study by 
Arstein-Kerslake and Peck (1985), reported two dimensions among which DUI offenders can be 
distinguished. One dimension represented problem drinking and the other represented problem 
driving. On the basis of the results presented in Arstein-Kerslake and Peck, the authors of the 
present study believe that the current results support the view that IIDs can assist in reducing 
problem drinking while driving. However, the use of license suspension or revocation is 
effective in reducing both of these dimensions by demonstratively deterring impaired drivers 
who have been apprehended and also by deterring potential alcohol-impaired drivers from 
driving impaired in the first place. The results in the present report show that when an IID-
restricted license supplants the use of license suspension or revocation, there is an associated 
increase in total crashes in general and fatal/injury crashes in particular. These findings are 
further supported by DeYoung (2013), who noted that it is clear that some DUI offenders 
represent a risk on the roads beyond just driving impaired; suggesting that using license 
suspension to mitigate traffic safety risk should be an important DUI countermeasure goal. That 
is, license suspension works to control the overall traffic safety risk of first- and repeat-DUI 
offenders, and when used administratively reduces alcohol-involved incidents as well. 
One promising solution that addresses a need to preserve the use of suspensions and revocations 
and combines it with ignition interlock is the IID program legislated under SB 598 (Statutes of 
2009, Chapter 193, Huff – see Appendix E). This law offers an incentive for alcohol-only second 
72 

--- p107
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
and third misdemeanor DUI offenders to shorten their required suspension/revocation period 
provided they install an IID. Consequently, SB 598 offers potentially optimal use of both 
licensing actions and IID countermeasures, and, therefore, the effectiveness of this particular law 
should be evaluated. In addition, SB 598 potentially addresses obvious shortcomings of AB 91 
and other existing IID programs in the state. Specifically, the IID program under SB 598 law 
“recognizes” that IIDs prevent drivers from driving under the influence of alcohol and have no 
value in preventing them from driving under the influence of drugs. Although SB 598 law 
shortens required suspension or revocation period for eligible DUI offenders, it does not 
completely eliminate licensing actions. Thus, instead of being completely eliminated, driver 
license suspension or revocation actions could be combined with IID requirements as these two 
measures may help reduce alcohol-related incidents in different ways. However, before these two 
countermeasures are combined, it needs to be determined what are the most appropriate or 
optimal periods of hard license suspension or revocation that different types of DUI offenders 
need to serve prior to obtaining an IID-restricted license. As DeYoung (2013) emphasized, 
shortening license suspension too drastically might result in eliminating significant general 
deterrent effect of license suspension, a move which compromises overall traffic safety. 
DUI offenders in California are currently subject to a combination of various sanctions, 
penalties, and interventions relative to their DUI offender status and aimed at preventing them 
from future impaired driving and crash-involved episodes. The effectiveness of each of these 
sanctions and penalties varies depending on different circumstances such as whether they are 
implemented alone or in combination with others. There is a tendency over time to add new 
requirements or introduce new programs that DUI offenders must comply with in order to 
relicense. However, as DeYoung argued in his recent paper (2013), continuing to add new 
requirements may result in discouraging DUI offenders altogether from complying with all 
conditions to reinstate their driving privilege and indirectly forcing them out of reach of the post-
licensing control system. Therefore, before a new requirement is added to the already 
complicated set of DUI countermeasures in California, any such new requirements must 
demonstrate “convincing traffic safety benefits” (DeYoung, 2013). 
Recommendations 
The results of the analyses presented in this report clearly show that the IID-restricted license 
program, as implemented in the 4-county pilot authorized under AB 91, has mixed traffic safety 
impacts. There is strong evidence of a reduction in DUI recidivism, across all offender levels, 
among those obtaining an IID-restricted license under the provisions of this law. However, there 
73 

--- p108
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
is also strong evidence of a consistent increase in crashes, including fatal/injury crashes, among 
these same drivers. The state has a compelling interest in reducing the toll of motor vehicle-
related injuries and fatalities. This interest is expressed in the state’s commitment to the 
Strategic Highway Safety Plan and is in keeping with associated federal laws and regulations, 
such as MAP-21 (“Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century,” P.L. 112-141). Although 
the reduction in DUI recidivism provides evidence of benefits associated with IID restrictions, 
the increased crash risks associated with the AB 91 pilot program suggest that additional 
investigation and research could be beneficial. 
Inclusion of information regarding crash 
responsibility (i.e. at-fault/not-at-fault), alcohol involvement, or severity level (i.e. fatal/injury 
crashes vs property-damage only crashes) may provide further insight. 
The following 
recommendations are therefore offered based on the findings of this study. 
1. The Department should implement its planned evaluation of SB 598. An evaluation of 
the traffic safety benefits of the IID program legislated under this law is important 
because it will determine how effective is the shortening of the proven-effective 
countermeasure of a hard license suspension or revocation period among qualifying DUI 
offenders when offered the option of an IID-restricted license. If found effective, SB 598 
could be adopted and/or incorporated into a new comprehensive IID program for drivers 
convicted of alcohol-related DUI offenses. 
2. The Department should conduct and report to the Legislature a quantitative evaluation of 
prior California studies focusing on the efficacy of DUI countermeasures already in place 
in California. This report would offer recommendations for legislative reform as to 
which existing countermeasures are more effective and should be retained and/or 
expanded and which countermeasures are currently less effective and therefore should be 
revised and strengthened. Such an effort would involve the application of a meta-
analytical technique focusing on potential topical areas such as (1) driver-based 
countermeasures (e.g., minimum-age drinking laws, APS laws, lower per se BAC for 
repeat offenders, public information and education); (2) vehicle-based countermeasures 
(e.g., IID, vehicle impoundment); and (3) other countermeasures that have an impact on 
alcohol-impaired driving (e.g., DUI Court and alcohol beverage control). The results will 
assist lawmakers and traffic safety administrators in proposing and implementing DUI 
countermeasures that are potentially effective and, therefore, reduce the risk of 
unintended consequences such as increased crash risk. 
74 

--- p109
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
3. The Department should work with representatives from the courts, law enforcement, and 
other involved entities, through the Strategic Highway Safety Plan (SHSP) process or 
otherwise, to explore options for the use of IIDs as a potentially effective DUI 
countermeasure. Specifically, there are some recent attempts in California (such as in 
San Joaquin County) that include using IIDs as an “alcohol-abstinence-compliance” 
monitoring tool, as part of a modified version of the traditional DUI court model. In 
addition to IID use, this DUI court model encompasses the use of an alcohol detection 
ankle bracelet for two different levels of court supervision and treatment monitoring of 
convicted repeat DUI offenders. This approach offers potentially promising results; 
further investment and exploration of this or similar efforts may result in empirical 
evidence to support the effective use of IIDs as a DUI and traffic safety countermeasure. 
4. The Department should convene a task force, including representatives from the 
judiciary, law enforcement, and other public or private agencies whose work includes 
oversight, administration, or enforcement of various aspects of the DUI countermeasure 
system. The purpose of this task force would be to develop recommendations for further 
actions (including potential model legislation), for strengthening components of 
California's comprehensive DUI countermeasure system (e.g., IIDs, suspension and 
revocation actions, DUI courts, vehicle impoundment, DUI treatment program, etc.).  
These recommendations for further actions may be based on the information gathered as 
part of recommendations #1, #2, and #3 (above), and other research findings or policy 
considerations where appropriate. 
75 

--- p110
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
76 

--- p111
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
REFERENCES 
Allison, P. D. (1995). Survival analysis using SAS, a practical guide. Cary, NC: SAS Institute 
Inc. 
Arstein-Kerslake, G. W., & Peck, R. C. (1985). A typological analysis of California DUI 
offenders and DUI recidivism correlates (Report No. 100). Sacramento, CA: California 
Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Ata, N., & Sozer, M. T. (2007). Cox regression models with nonproportional hazards applied to 
lung cancer data. Hacettepe Journal of Mathematics and Statistics, 36(2), 157-167. 
Campbell, D. T., & Stanley, J. C. (1963). Experimental and quasi-experimental design for 
research. Chicago, IL: Rand McNally College Publishing Company. 
Chapman, E. A., Oulad Daoud, S., & Masten, S. V. (2015). General deterrent evaluation of 
ignition interlock pilot program in California (Report No. 247). Sacramento, CA: California 
Department of Motor Vehicles. 
DeYoung, D. J. (2013). Traffic safety impact of judicial and administrative driver license 
suspension. Transportation Research Circular, E-C174, 41–53. 
DeYoung, D. J., Tashima, H. N., & Masten, S. V. (2005). An evaluation of the effectiveness of 
ignition interlock in California: Technical report (Report No. 217). Sacramento, CA: 
California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Elder, R. W., Voas, R., Beirness, D., Shults, R. A., Sleet, D. A., Nichols, J. L., . . . Task Force on 
Community Preventive Services. (2011). Effectiveness of ignition interlocks for preventing 
alcohol-impaired driving and alcohol-related crashes: A community guide systematic review. 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 40(3), 362-376. 
EMT Group. (1990). Evaluation of the California ignition interlock pilot program for DUI 
offenders, final report. Sacramento, CA: Author 
Friedman, H. S., & Thurman, P. W. (2012). Propensity score matching, adjustment, and 
randomized experiments course notes. Cary, NC: SAS Institute Inc. 
Fulkerson, A. (2003). The ignition interlock system: An evidentiary tool becomes a sentencing 
element. Court review, Winter 2003, 18-22. Retrieved October 14, 2014, from 
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1125&context=ajacourtreview 
Gebers, M. A. (2009). Enhanced Negligent Operator Treatment Evaluation System program 
effectiveness report #1 (Summary of findings) (Report No. 230). Sacramento, CA: California 
Department of Motor Vehicles. 
77 

--- p112
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Gebers, M. A., & Roberts, R. A. (2004). Characteristics of negligent operators in California 
(Report No. 209). Sacramento, CA: California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Hagen, R. E. (1977). The effectiveness of license suspension or revocation for drivers convicted 
of multiple driving-under-the-influence offenses (Report No. 59). Sacramento, CA: California 
Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Helander, C. J. (2002). DUI countermeasures in California: What works and what doesn’t, with 
recommendations for legislative reform (Report No. 197). Sacramento, CA: California 
Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Hosmer, D. W., & Lemeshow, S. (1999). Applied survival analysis. New York, NY: John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc. 
Janke, M., & Peck R. C. (1991). Accident reporting: Is there a problem? Unpublished report. 
Sacramento, CA: California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Kirk, R. E. (1968). Experimental design: Procedures for the behavioral sciences. Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth Publishing Company, Inc. 
Marques, P. R., Voas, R. B., Roth, R., & Tippetts, A. S. (2010). Evaluation of the New Mexico 
ignition interlock program (Report No. DOT HS 811 410). Washington, DC: National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration. 
McCartt, A. T., Leaf, W. A., Farmer, C. M., & Eichelberger, A. H. (2013). Washington State’s 
alcohol ignition interlock law: Effects on recidivism among first-time DUI offenders. Traffic 
Injury Prevention, 14, 215–229. 
Oulad Daoud, S., Tashima, H. N., & Grippe, R. (2015). Annual report of the California DUI 
management information system. Annual report to the Legislature of the State of California 
(Report No. 250). Sacramento, CA: California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Patetta, M. (2006). Survival analysis using the proportional hazards model course notes. Cary, 
NC: SAS Institute Inc. 
Rogers, P. N. (1995). The general deterrent impact of California’s 0.08% blood alcohol 
concentration limit and administrative per se license suspension laws, Volume 1 (Report No. 
158). Sacramento, CA: California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Rogers, P. N. (1997). The specific deterrent impact of California’s 0.08% blood alcohol 
concentration limit and administrative per se license suspension laws, Volume 2 (Report No. 
167). Sacramento, CA: California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Ross, H. L. (1982). Deterring the drinking driver. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books. 
Rosenbaum, P. R., & Rubin, D. R. (1985). Constructing a control group using multivariate 
matched sampling methods that incorporate the propensity score. The American Statistician, 
39(1), 33-38. 
78 

--- p113
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Roth, R., Voas, R. B., & Marques, P. R. (2007). Interlocks for first offenders: effective? Traffic 
Injury Prevention, 8, 346-352. 
Tabachnick, B. G., & Fidell, L. S. (2001). Using multivariate statistics (4th ED.). Needham 
Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 
Tashima, H. N., & Helander, C. J. (2005). Annual report of the California DUI management 
information system. Annual report to the Legislature of the State of California (Report No. 
211). Sacramento, CA: California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Tashima, H. N., & Marelich, W. D. (1989). A comparison of the relative effectiveness of 
alternative sanctions for DUI offenders (Report No. 122). Sacramento, CA: California 
Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Tashima, H. N., & Peck, R. C. (1986). An evaluation of the specific deterrent effects of 
alternative sanctions for first and repeat DUI offenders (Report No. 95). Sacramento, CA: 
California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
United States Government Accountability Office (2014). Report to the chairman, committee on 
commerce, science, and transportation, U. S. Senate. Alcohol ignition interlocks are effective 
while installed; Less is known how to increase installation rates (GAO-14-559). Retrieved 
September 8, 2014, from http://www.gao.gov/assets/670/664281.pdf 
Voas, R. B., & Lacey, J. C. (2011). Alcohol and Highway Safety 2006: A Review of the State of 
Knowledge (Report No. DOT HS 811 374). Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration. 
Voas, R. B., Tippetts, A. S., & Grosz, M. (2013). Administrative reinstatements interlock 
programs: Florida, a 10-year study. Alcoholism, Clinical & Experimental Research, 37(7), 
1243–1251. 
Wagenaar, A. C., & Maldonado-Molina, M. M. (2007). Effects of drivers’ license suspension 
policies on alcohol-related crash involvement: Long-term follow-up in forty-six states. 
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 31(8), 1399-1406. 
79 

--- p114
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
80 

--- p115
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
APPENDICES 
81 

--- p116
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assembly Bill No. 91, CHAPTER 217
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
   APPENDIX A 
Assembly Bill No. 91 
CHAPTER 217 
An act to amend Sections 13386 and 23576 of, and to add and repeal 
Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 23700) of Division 11.5 of, the 
Vehicle Code, relating to vehicles. 
[Approved by Governor October 11, 2009. Filed with 
Secretary of State October 11, 2009.] 
LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL’S DIGEST 
AB 91, Feuer. Vehicles: driving under the influence (DUI): ignition 
interlock device. 
(1) Existing law requires all manufacturers of ignition interlock devices 
that meet specified requirements and are certified in a manner approved by 
the Department of Motor Vehicles, that intend to market the devices in this 
state, to first apply to the department on forms provided by the department 
and to pay an accompanying fee in an amount not to exceed the amount 
necessary to cover the costs incurred by the department in carrying out 
those provisions. 
This bill would require a manufacturer and a manufacturer’s agent, 
certified by the department to provide ignition interlock devices, to provide 
each year to the department information on the number of false positives 
and the time to reset the device. The bill would also require the department 
to use this information in evaluating the continued certification of an 
ignition interlock device. 
(2) Existing law requires a person’s privilege to operate a motor vehicle 
to be suspended or revoked for a specified period of time if the person has 
been convicted of violating specified provisions prohibiting driving a 
motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or drug 
or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and drug, or with 
0.08% or more, by weight, of alcohol in his or her blood or while addicted 
to the use of any drug, with or without bodily injury to another. Existing 
law also authorizes a person whose privilege is suspended or revoked in 
that manner to receive a restricted driver’s license if specified requirements 
are met, including, in some instances, the installation of an ignition 
interlock device on the person’s vehicle. 
This bill would require the department to establish a pilot program from 
July 1, 2010, to January 1, 2016, in the Counties of Alameda, Los Angeles, 
Sacramento, and Tulare that requires, as a condition of being issued a 
restricted driver’s license, being reissued a driver’s license, or having the 
privilege to operate a motor vehicle reinstated subsequent to a conviction 
for a violation of the above offenses, a person to install for a specified 
period of time an ignition interlock device on all vehicles he or she owns 
or operates, except as provided. The amount of time the ignition interlock 
device would be required to be installed would be based upon the number 
82 

--- p117
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
of convictions, as prescribed. The bill would prohibit the implementation 
of the pilot program if the department fails to obtain, by January 31, 2010, 
nonstate funds for the programming costs of the pilot program. The bill 
would set up a statutory scheme under which the department would, with 
regard to the installation of an ignition interlock device described above, 
notify the person of the ignition interlock device installation requirements 
established under the bill, accept notification from the installer of the 
ignition interlock device of attempts to remove, bypass, or tamper with the 
ignition interlock device or if the person fails 3 or more times to comply 
with the maintenance requirements, monitor the installation and 
maintenance of the ignition interlock device, and keep specified records. 
The bill would also require that manufacturers and manufacturer’s agents, 
certified by the department to provide ignition interlock devices, adopt a 
fee schedule for payment of the costs of the ignition interlock device based 
on the offender’s ability to pay, and would require the court to adopt a 
similar fee schedule with regard to the fees for the county alcohol and drug 
problem assessment program. 
On or before January 1, 2015, the department would be required to 
report to the Legislature regarding the effectiveness of the pilot program in 
reducing the number of first-time driving under the influence violations 
and repeat offenses in those counties. 
(3) This bill would require that it become operative only if SB 598 of the 
2009–10 Regular Session becomes operative on or before January 1, 2010. 
(4) Because it is a crime to operate a vehicle that is not equipped with a 
functioning, certified ignition interlock device by a person whose driving 
privilege is so restricted, the bill would impose a state-mandated local 
program by expanding the scope of that crime. 
(5) The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local 
agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by the state. 
Statutory provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement. 
This bill would provide that no reimbursement is required by this act for a 
specified reason. 
The people of the State of California do enact as follows: 
SECTION 1. Section 13386 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 
13386. (a) (1) The Department of Motor Vehicles shall certify or cause to 
be certified ignition interlock devices required by Article 5 (commencing 
with Section 23575) of Chapter 2 of Division 11.5 and publish a list of 
approved devices. 
(2) (A) The Department of Motor Vehicles shall ensure that ignition 
interlock devices that have been certified according to the requirements of 
this section continue to meet certification requirements. The department 
may periodically require manufacturers to indicate in writing whether the 
devices continue to meet certification requirements. 
(B) The department may use denial of certification, suspension or 
revocation of certification, or decertification of an ignition interlock device 
in another state as an indication that the certification requirements are not 
met, if either of the following apply: 
(i) The denial of certification, suspension or revocation of certification, 
or decertification in another state constitutes a violation by the 
manufacturer of Article 2.55 (commencing with Section 125.00) of 
Chapter 1 of Division 1 of the Title 13 of the California Code of 
Regulations. 
83 

--- p118
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
(ii) The denial of certification for an ignition interlock device in another 
state was due to a failure of an ignition interlock device to meet the 
standards adopted by the regulation set forth in clause (i), specifically 
Sections 1 and 2 of the model specification for breath alcohol ignition 
interlock devices, as published by notice in the Federal Register, Vol. 57, 
No. 67, Tuesday, April 7, 1992, on pages 11774 to 11787, inclusive. 
(C) Failure to continue to meet certification requirements shall result in 
suspension or revocation of certification of ignition interlock devices. 
(b) (1) A manufacturer shall not furnish an installer, service center, 
technician, or consumer with technology or information that allows a 
device to be used in a manner that is contrary to the purpose for which it is 
certified. (2) Upon a violation of paragraph (1), the department shall 
suspend or revoke the certification of the ignition interlock device that is 
the subject of that violation. 
(c) An installer, service center, or technician shall not tamper with, 
change, or alter the functionality of the device from its certified criteria. 
(d) The department shall utilize information from an independent 
laboratory to certify ignition interlock devices on or off the premises of the 
manufacturer or manufacturer’s agent, in accordance with the guidelines. 
The cost of certification shall be borne by the manufacturers of ignition 
interlock devices. If the certification of a device is suspended or revoked, 
the manufacturer of the device shall be responsible for, and shall bear the 
cost of, the removal of the device and the replacement of a certified device 
of the manufacturer or another manufacturer. 
(e) No model of ignition interlock device shall be certified unless it 
meets the accuracy requirements and specifications provided in the 
guidelines 
adopted 
by 
the 
National 
Highway 
Traffic 
Safety 
Administration. 
(f) All manufacturers of ignition interlock devices that meet the 
requirements of subdivision (e) and are certified in a manner approved by 
the Department of Motor Vehicles, who intend to market the devices in 
this state, first shall apply to the Department of Motor Vehicles on forms 
provided by that department. The application shall be accompanied by a 
fee in an amount not to exceed the amount necessary to cover the costs 
incurred by the department in carrying out this section. 
(g) A manufacturer and a manufacturer’s agent certified by the 
department to provide ignition interlock devices shall provide each year to 
the department information on the number of false positives and the time 
to reset the device. The department shall use this information in evaluating 
the continued certification of an ignition interlock device. 
(h) The department shall ensure that standard forms and procedures are 
developed for documenting decisions and compliance and communicating 
results to relevant agencies. These forms shall include all of the following: 
(1) An “Option to Install,” to be sent by the Department of Motor 
Vehicles to repeat offenders along with the mandatory order of suspension 
or revocation. This shall include the alternatives available for early license 
reinstatement with the installation of an ignition interlock device and shall 
be accompanied by a toll-free telephone number for each manufacturer of 
a certified ignition interlock device. Information regarding approved 
installation locations shall be provided to drivers by manufacturers with 
ignition interlock devices that have been certified in accordance with this 
section. 
84 

--- p119
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
(2) A “Verification of Installation” to be returned to the department by 
the reinstating offender upon application for reinstatement. Copies shall be 
provided for the manufacturer or the manufacturer’s agent. 
(3) A “Notice of Noncompliance” and procedures to ensure continued 
use of the ignition interlock device during the restriction period and to 
ensure compliance with maintenance requirements. The maintenance 
period shall be standardized at 60 days to maximize monitoring checks for 
equipment tampering. 
(i) Every manufacturer and manufacturer’s agent certified by the 
department to provide ignition interlock devices shall adopt fee schedules 
that provide for the payment of the costs of the device by applicants in 
amounts commensurate with the applicant’s ability to pay. 
SEC. 2. Section 23576 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 
23576. (a) Notwithstanding Sections 23575 and 23700, if a person is 
required to operate a motor vehicle in the course and scope of his or her 
employment and if the vehicle is owned by the employer, the person may 
operate that vehicle without installation of an approved ignition interlock 
device if the employer has been notified by the person that the person’s 
driving privilege has been restricted pursuant to Sections 23575 and 23700 
and if the person has proof of that notification in his or her possession, or if 
the notice, or a facsimile copy thereof, is with the vehicle. 
(b) A motor vehicle owned by a business entity that is all or partly 
owned or controlled by a person otherwise subject to Sections 23575 and 
23700, is not a motor vehicle owned by the employer subject to the 
exemption in subdivision (a). 
SEC. 3. Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 23700) is added to 
Division 11.5 of the Vehicle Code, to read: 
Chapter 5. Ignition Interlock Devices 
23700. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Department 
of Motor Vehicles shall establish a pilot program in the Counties of 
Alameda, Los Angeles, Sacramento, and Tulare to reduce the number of 
first-time violations and repeat offenses of Sections 23152 and 23153, as 
follows: 
(1) The Department of Motor Vehicles, upon receipt of the court’s 
abstract conviction for a violation listed in paragraph (7), shall inform the 
convicted person of the requirements of this section, including the term for 
which the person is required to have a certified ignition interlock device 
installed. The records of the department shall reflect the mandatory use of 
the device for the term required and the time when the device is required to 
be installed by this code. 
(2) The department shall advise the person that installation of an ignition 
interlock device on a vehicle does not allow the person to drive without a 
valid driver’s license. 
(3) Before a driver’s license may be issued, reissued, or returned to a 
person after a suspension or revocation of that person’s driving privilege 
that requires the installation of an ignition interlock device, a person who 
is notified by the department pursuant to paragraph (1) shall complete all 
of the following: 
(A) Arrange for each vehicle owned or operated by the person to be 
fitted with an ignition interlock device by a certified ignition interlock 
device provider under Section 13386. 
85 

--- p120
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
(B) Notify the department and provide to the department proof of 
installation by submitting the “Verification of Installation” form described 
in paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of Section 13386. 
(C) Pay the fee, determined by the department, that is sufficient to cover 
the costs of administration of this section. 
(4) The department shall place a restriction on the driver’s license record 
of the convicted person that states the driver is restricted to driving only 
vehicles equipped with a certified ignition interlock device. 
(5) (A) A person who is notified by the department pursuant to 
paragraph 
(1) shall arrange for each vehicle with an ignition interlock device to be 
serviced by the installer at least once every 60 days in order for the 
installer to recalibrate and monitor the operation of the device. 
(B) The installer shall notify the department if the device is removed or 
indicates that the person has attempted to remove, bypass, or tamper with 
the device, or if the person fails three or more times to comply with any 
requirement for the maintenance or calibration of the ignition interlock 
device. 
(6) The department shall monitor the installation and maintenance of the 
ignition interlock device installed pursuant to paragraph (1). 
(7) A person is required to install an ignition interlock device for the 
applicable term as a condition of being issued a restricted driver’s license, 
being reissued a driver’s license, or having the privilege to operate a motor 
vehicle reinstated subsequent to a conviction for a violation or a 
suspension of a person’s driver’s license, as follows: 
(A) A person convicted of a violation of Section 23152 shall be required 
to install an ignition interlock device, as follows: 
(i) Upon a first offense, the person shall install an ignition interlock 
device in all vehicles owned or operated by that person for a mandatory 
term of five months. 
(ii) Upon a second offense, the person shall install an ignition interlock 
device in all vehicles owned or operated by that person for a mandatory 
term of 12 months. 
(iii) Upon a third offense, the person shall install an ignition interlock 
device in all vehicles owned or operated by that person for a mandatory 
term of 24 months. 
(iv) Upon a fourth offense or any subsequent violation, the person shall 
install an ignition interlock device in all vehicles owned or operated by that 
person for a mandatory term of 36 months. 
(B) A person convicted of a violation of Section 23153 shall install an 
ignition interlock device, as follows: 
(i) Upon a first offense, the person shall install an ignition interlock 
device in all vehicles owned or operated by that person for a mandatory 
term of 12 months. 
(ii) Upon a second offense, the person shall install an ignition interlock 
device in all vehicles owned or operated by that person for a mandatory 
term of 24 months. 
(iii) Upon a third offense, the person shall install an ignition interlock 
device in all vehicles owned or operated by that person for a mandatory 
term of 36 months. 
(iv) Upon a fourth offense or any subsequent violation, the person shall 
install an ignition interlock device in all vehicles owned or operated by that 
person for a mandatory term of 48 months. 
86 

--- p121
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
(C) The terms prescribed in this paragraph shall begin once a person has 
provided to the department proof of installation pursuant to paragraph (2) 
of subdivision (h) of Section 13386 and upon restoration of the driving 
privilege pursuant to Section 13352. 
(8) A person who is notified by the department, pursuant to this 
subdivision, is exempt from the requirements of this subdivision if within 
30 days of the notification, the person certifies to the department all of the 
following: 
(A) The person does not own a vehicle. 
(B) The person does not have access to a vehicle at his or her residence. 
(C) The person no longer has access to the vehicle being driven by the 
person at the time he or she was arrested for a violation that subsequently 
resulted in a conviction for a violation listed in this subdivision. 
(D) The person acknowledges that he or she is only allowed to drive a 
vehicle that is fitted with a functioning ignition interlock device. 
(E) The person acknowledges that he or she is required to have a valid 
driver’s license before he or she can drive. 
(F) The person is subject to the requirements of this section when he or 
she purchases or has access to a vehicle. 
(9) Subdivisions (j), (k), (m), (n), and (o) of Section 23575 apply to this 
section. 
(10) If a person fails to comply with any of the requirements regarding 
ignition interlock devices, the mandatory term for which the ignition 
interlock device is required to be installed shall be reset by the department. 
(b) (1) Every manufacturer and manufacturer’s agent certified by the 
department to provide ignition interlock devices, under Section 13386, 
shall adopt the following fee schedule that provides for the payment of the 
costs of the ignition interlock device by offenders subject to this chapter in 
amounts commensurate with that person’s income relative to the federal 
poverty level, as defined in Section 127400 of the Health and Safety Code: 
(A) A person with an income at 100 percent of the federal poverty level 
and below is responsible for 10 percent of the cost of the ignition interlock 
device. The ignition interlock device provider is responsible for absorbing 
the cost of the ignition interlock device that is not paid by the person. 
(B) A person with an income at 101 to 200 percent of the federal 
poverty level is responsible for 25 percent of the cost of the ignition 
interlock device. The ignition interlock device provider is responsible for 
absorbing the cost of the ignition interlock device that is not paid by the 
person. 
(C) A person with an income at 201 to 300 percent of the federal 
poverty level is responsible for 50 percent of the cost of the ignition 
interlock device. The ignition interlock device provider is responsible for 
absorbing the cost of the ignition interlock device that is not paid by the 
person. 
(D) All other offenders are responsible for 100 percent of the cost of the 
ignition interlock device. 
(2) The cost of the ignition interlock device may only be raised annually 
equal to the Consumer Price Index. 
(3) The offender’s income may be verified by presentation of that 
person’s current federal income tax return or three months of monthly 
income statements. 
(c) This section does not permit a person to drive without a valid 
driver’s license. 
87 

--- p122
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
(d) The requirements of this section are in addition to any other 
requirements of law. 
(e) For the purposes of this section, “vehicle” does not include a 
motorcycle until the state certifies an ignition interlock device that can be 
installed on a motorcycle. A person subject to an ignition interlock device 
restriction shall not operate a motorcycle for the duration of the ignition 
interlock device restriction period. 
(f) This section shall become operative on July 1, 2010. 23700.5. The 
department shall not implement Section 23700 if, by January 31, 2010, the 
department fails to obtain nonstate funds for the programming costs of the 
pilot program specified in Section 23700. 23701. On or before January 1, 
2015, the Department of Motor Vehicles shall report to the Legislature 
regarding the effectiveness of the pilot program authorized under this 
chapter in reducing the number of first-time violations and repeat offenses 
of Sections 23152 and 23153 in the Counties of Alameda, Los Angeles, 
Sacramento, and Tulare. 
23702. This chapter shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2016, 
and as of that date is repealed, unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted 
before January 1, 2016, deletes or extends that date. 
SEC. 4. This bill shall become operative only if Senate Bill 598 of the 
2009–10 Regular Session is enacted and becomes operative on or before 
January 1, 2010. 
SEC. 5. No reimbursement is required by this act pursuant to Section 6 
of Article XIII B of the California Constitution because the only costs that 
may be incurred by a local agency or school district will be incurred 
because this act creates a new crime or infraction, eliminates a crime or 
infraction, or changes the penalty for a crime or infraction, within the 
meaning of Section 17556 of the Government Code, or changes the 
definition of a crime within the meaning of Section 6 of Article XIII B of 
the California Constitution. 
O 
88 

--- p123
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Order of Installment of an Ignition 
Interlock Device
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
APPENDIX B 
89 

--- p124

--- p125
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Variables Assessed for Propensity Score Matching Equations
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
APPENDIX D 
Variables Assessed for Propensity Score Matching Equations 
1) Age 
2) Gender 
3) License class 
4) Prior 3-year had-been-drinking crashes 
5) Prior 3-year nighttime crashes 
6) Prior 3-year fatal/injury crashes 
7) Prior 3-year weekend crashes 
8) Prior 3-year total crashes 
9) Prior 3-year total convictions 
10) Prior 3-year minor convictions 
11) Prior 3-year major convictions 
12) Prior 3-year zip code total crashes 
13) Prior 3-year zip code injury crashes 
14) Prior 3-year zip code total convictions 
15) Prior 3-year zip code moving violations 
16) Prior 3-year zip code major convictions 
17) License class 
18) Prior 3-year first APS suspension 
19) Prior 3-year repeat APS suspension 
20) BAC level of qualifying DUI violation 
21) Days in study 
91 

--- p126
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Senate Bill No. 598, CHAPTER 193
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
APPENDIX E 
Senate Bill No. 598 
CHAPTER 193 
An act to amend Sections 13352, 13352.5, 23109, 23550, 23550.5, 
23552, 23566, and 23568 of the Vehicle Code, relating to vehicles. 
[Approved by Governor October 11, 2009. Filed with 
Secretary of State October 11, 2009.] 
LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL’S DIGEST 
SB 598, Huff. Vehicles: driving under the influence (DUI). 
(1) Existing law requires a person’s privilege to operate a motor vehicle 
to be suspended or revoked for a specified period of time if the person has 
been convicted of violating specified provisions prohibiting driving a 
motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or drug, 
or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and drug, or with 
0.08% or more, by weight, of alcohol in his or her blood, or who is 
addicted to the use of any drug. Existing law authorizes a person whose 
privilege is suspended or revoked in that manner to receive a restricted 
driver’s license if specified requirements are met, including, in some 
instances, the installation of a certified ignition interlock device on the 
person’s vehicle. 
Existing law requires that a person, convicted of driving under the 
influence, without bodily injury to another, within 10 years of being 
convicted of a separate violation of one of specified driving-under-the­
influence offenses, be punished by his or her driving privilege being 
suspended for 2 years. The Department of Motor Vehicles is required to 
advise the person that he or she may apply for a restricted driver’s license 
after completion of 12 months of the suspension period, which may 
include credit for a specified concurrent suspension, subject to certain 
conditions, including, among other things, submitting proof of installation 
of a certified ignition interlock device, agreeing to maintain the ignition 
interlock device, and paying certain fees, including, but not limited to, all 
administrative fees or reissue fees. 
This bill would instead require the department to advise a person, who 
was only under the influence of an alcoholic beverage at the time of the 
violation, that he or she may apply for a restricted driver’s license after 
completion of 90 days of the suspension period, under certain 
circumstances. 
(2) Existing law requires that a person convicted of driving under the 
influence, without bodily injury to another, within 10 years of being 
convicted of 2 separate violations of specified driving-under-the-influence 
offenses, be punished by his or her driving privilege being revoked for 3 
years. The department is required to advise the person that he or she may 
apply for a restricted driver’s license after completion of 12 months of the 
92 

--- p127
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
revocation period, which may include credit for a specified concurrent 
suspension, subject to certain conditions, including, among other things, 
satisfactory completion of 12 months of an 18-month or 30-month driving­
under-the-influence program, submitting proof of installation of a certified 
ignition interlock device, agreeing to maintain the ignition interlock 
device, and paying certain fees. 
This bill would instead require the department to advise a person, who 
was found to be only under the influence of an alcoholic beverage at the 
time of the violation, of his or her ability to apply for a restricted driver’s 
license after completion of 6 months of the revocation period, subject to 
certain conditions, including that if the person is convicted of a specified 
offense that person subsequently satisfactorily provides proof of 
enrollment in an 18-month or 30-month driving-under-the-influence 
program, as prescribed. The bill would require the person to pay a fee 
sufficient to cover the costs of administration, as determined by the 
department. 
(3) This bill would require that a person convicted of driving under the 
influence of any drug or the combined influence of any drug and an 
alcoholic beverage, without bodily injury to another, within 10 years of 
being convicted of a separate violation of one of the specified driving­
under-the-influence offenses, be punished by his or her driving privilege 
being revoked for 2 years. This bill would authorize the department to 
reinstate the privilege provided certain conditions are met. This bill would 
require the department to advise the person that he or she may apply for a 
restricted driver’s license after completion of 12 months of the suspended 
period, subject to certain conditions including, among other things, that the 
person provides proof of enrollment in an 18-month or 30-month driving­
under-the-influence program, as prescribed. 
(4) This bill would also require a person convicted of driving under the 
influence of any drug or the combined influence of any drug and an 
alcoholic beverage, without bodily injury to another, within 10 years of 
being convicted of 2 separate violations of specified driving-under-the­
influence offenses, be punished by his or her driving privilege being 
revoked for 3 years. This bill would authorize the department to reinstate 
the privilege provided certain conditions are met. This bill would require 
the department to advise the person that he or she may apply for a 
restricted driver’s license after completion of 12 months of the suspended 
period, subject to certain conditions, including, among other things, that 
the person has satisfactorily completed the initial 12 months of an 18­
month or 30-month driving-under-the-influence program as prescribed. 
(5) This bill would make other conforming changes. 
(6) This bill would become operative on July 1, 2010. 
The people of the State of California do enact as follows: 
SECTION 1. Section 13352 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 
13352. (a) The department shall immediately suspend or revoke the 
privilege of a person to operate a motor vehicle upon the receipt of an 
abstract of the record of a court showing that the person has been 
convicted of a violation of Section 23152 or 23153, subdivision (a) of 
Section 23109, or Section 23109.1, or upon the receipt of a report of a 
judge of the juvenile court, a juvenile traffic hearing officer, or a referee of 
a juvenile court showing that the person has been found to have committed 
93 

--- p128
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
a violation of Section 23152 or 23153 or subdivision (a) of Section 23109 
or Section 23109.1. If an offense specified in this section occurs in a 
vehicle defined in Section 15210, the suspension or revocation specified 
below shall apply to the noncommercial driving privilege. The commercial 
driving privilege shall be disqualified as specified in Sections 15300 to 
15302, inclusive. For the purposes of this section, suspension or revocation 
shall be as follows: 
(1) Except as required under Section 13352.1 or 13352.4, upon a 
conviction or finding of a violation of Section 23152 punishable under 
Section 23536, the privilege shall be suspended for a period of six months. 
The privilege may not be reinstated until the person gives proof of 
financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to the department of 
successful completion of a driving-under-the-influence program licensed 
pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code described in 
subdivision (b) of Section 23538. If the court, as authorized under 
paragraph (3) of subdivision (b) of Section 23646, elects to order a person 
to enroll in, participate in, and complete either program described in 
subdivision (b) of Section 23542, the department shall require that 
program in lieu of the program described in subdivision (b) of Section 
23538. For the purposes of this paragraph, enrollment in, participation in, 
and completion of an approved program shall be subsequent to the date of 
the current violation. Credit may not be given to any program activities 
completed prior to the date of the current violation.  
(2) Upon a conviction or finding of a violation of Section 23153 
punishable under Section 23554, the privilege shall be suspended for a 
period of one year. The privilege may not be reinstated until the person 
gives proof of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to the 
department of successful completion of a driving-under-the-influence 
program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code 
as described in subdivision (b) of Section 23556. If the court, as authorized 
under paragraph (3) of subdivision (b) of Section 23646, elects to order a 
person to enroll in, participate in, and complete either program described 
in subdivision (b) of Section 23542, the department shall require that 
program in lieu of the program described in Section 23556. For the 
purposes of this paragraph, enrollment, participation, and completion of an 
approved program shall be subsequent to the date of the current violation. 
Credit may not be given to any program activities completed prior to the 
date of the current violation.  
(3) Except as provided in Section 13352.5, upon a conviction or finding 
of a violation of Section 23152 punishable under Section 23540, and if the 
person was found to be only under the influence of an alcoholic beverage 
at the time of the violation of Section 23152, the privilege shall be 
suspended for two years. The privilege may not be reinstated until the 
person gives proof of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory 
to the department of successful completion of a driving-under-the­
influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and 
Safety Code as described in subdivision (b) of Section 23542. For the 
purposes of this paragraph, enrollment in, participation in, and completion 
of an approved program shall be subsequent to the date of the current 
violation. Credit shall not be given to any program activities completed 
prior to the date of the current violation. The department shall advise a 
person convicted or found to be in violation of subdivision (a) or (b) of 
Section 23152 that after completion of 90 days of the suspension period, 
94 

--- p129
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
which may include credit for a suspension period served under subdivision 
(c) of Section 13353.3, the person may apply to the department for a 
restricted driver’s license. Eligibility for the restricted driver’s license is 
subject to the following conditions: 
(A) The person has satisfactorily provided, subsequent to the violation 
date of the current underlying conviction, either of the following: 
(i) Proof of enrollment in an 18-month driving-under-the-influence 
program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety 
Code. 
(ii) Proof of enrollment in a 30-month driving-under-the-influence 
program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety 
Code, if available in the county of the person’s residence or employment. 
(B) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to continue 
satisfactory participation in the program described in subparagraph (A). 
(C) The person submits the “Verification of Installation” form described 
in paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of Section 13386. 
(D) The person agrees to maintain the ignition interlock device as 
required under subdivision (g) of Section 23575. 
(E) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in 
Section 16430. 
(F) The person pays all reissue fees and any restriction fee required by 
the department. 
(G) The person pays to the department a fee sufficient to cover the costs 
of administration of this paragraph, as determined by the department. 
(H) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in 
subdivision (f) of Section 23575. 
(4) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of 
a violation of Section 23153 punishable under Section 23560, the privilege 
shall be revoked for a period of three years. The privilege may not be 
reinstated until the person gives proof of financial responsibility, and the 
person gives proof satisfactory to the department of successful completion 
of a driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 
11836 of the Health and Safety Code, as described in paragraph (4) of 
subdivision (b) of Section 23562. For the purposes of this paragraph, 
enrollment in, participation in, and completion of an approved program 
shall be subsequent to the date of the current violation. Credit shall not be 
given to any program activities completed prior to the date of the current 
violation. The department shall advise the person that after the completion 
of 12 months of the revocation period, which may include credit for a 
suspension period served under subdivision (c) of Section 13353.3, the 
person may apply to the department for a restricted driver’s license, subject 
to the following conditions: 
(A) The person has satisfactorily completed, subsequent to the violation 
date of the current underlying conviction, either of the following: 
(i) The initial 12 months of an 18-month driving-under-the-influence 
program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety 
Code. 
(ii) The initial 12 months of a 30-month driving-under-the-influence 
program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety 
Code, if available in the county of the person’s residence or employment, 
and the person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to continue 
satisfactory participation in that 30-month program. 
95 

--- p130
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
(B) The person submits the “Verification of Installation” form described 
in paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of Section 13386. 
(C) The person agrees to maintain the ignition interlock device as 
required under subdivision (g) of Section 23575. 
(D) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in 
Section 16430. 
(E) The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any 
restriction fee required by the department. 
(F) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in 
subdivision (f) of Section 23575. 
(5) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of 
a violation of Section 23152 punishable under Section 23546, and if the 
person was found to be only under the influence of an alcoholic beverage 
at the time of the violation of Section 23152, the privilege shall be revoked 
for a period of three years. The privilege may not be reinstated until the 
person files proof of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to 
the department of successful completion of one of the following programs: 
an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 
Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, as described in subdivision 
(b) or (c) of Section 23548, or, if available in the county of the person’s 
residence or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence 
program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety 
Code, or a program specified in Section 8001 of the Penal Code. For the 
purposes of this paragraph, enrollment in, participation in, and completion 
of an approved program shall be subsequent to the date of the current 
violation. Credit shall not be given to any program activities completed 
prior to the date of the current violation. The department shall advise a 
person convicted or found to be in violation of subdivision (a) or (b) of 
Section 23152 that after completion of six months of the revocation period, 
which may include credit for a suspension period served under subdivision 
(c) of Section 13353.3, the person may apply to the department for a 
restricted driver’s license. Eligibility for the restricted driver’s license is 
subject to the following conditions: 
(A) The person has satisfactorily provided, subsequent to the violation 
date of the current underlying conviction, one of the following: 
(i) With regard to a conviction under subdivision (a) or (b) of Section 
23152, proof of enrollment in an 18-month driving-under-the-influence 
program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety 
Code. 
(ii) With regard to a conviction under subdivision (a) or (b) of Section 
23152, proof of enrollment in a 30-month driving-under-the-influence 
program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety 
Code, if available in the county of the person’s residence or employment, 
and the person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to continue 
satisfactory participation in the 30-month driving-under-the-influence 
program. 
(B) The person submits the “Verification of Installation” form described 
in paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of Section 13386. 
(C) The person agrees to maintain the ignition interlock device as 
required under subdivision (g) of Section 23575. 
(D) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in 
Section 16430. 
96 

--- p131
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
(E) An individual convicted of a violation of Section 23152 punishable 
under Section 23546 may also, at any time after sentencing, petition the 
court for referral to an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program 
licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, or, if 
available in the county of the person’s residence or employment, a 30­
month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 
11836 of the Health and Safety Code. Unless good cause is shown, the 
court shall order the referral. 
(F) The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any 
restriction fee required by the department. 
(G) The person pays to the department a fee sufficient to cover the costs 
of administration of this paragraph, as determined by the department. 
(H) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in 
subdivision (f) of Section 23575. 
(6) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of 
a violation of Section 23152 punishable under Section 23540, and if the 
person was found to be under the influence of any drug or the combined 
influence of any drug and an alcoholic beverage, the privilege shall be 
suspended for two years. The privilege may not be reinstated until the 
person gives proof of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory 
to the department of successful completion of a driving-under-the­
influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and 
Safety Code as described in subdivision (b) of Section 23542. For the 
purposes of this paragraph, enrollment in, participation in, and completion 
of an approved program shall be subsequent to the date of the current 
violation. Credit shall not be given to any program activities completed 
prior to the date of the current violation. The department shall advise the 
person that after completion of 12 months of the suspension period, which 
may include credit for a suspension period served under subdivision (c) of 
Section 13353.3, the person may apply to the department for a restricted 
driver’s license, subject to the following conditions: 
(A) The person has satisfactorily provided, subsequent to the violation 
date of the current underlying conviction, either of the following: 
(i) Proof of enrollment in an 18-month driving-under-the-influence 
program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety 
Code. 
(ii) Proof of enrollment in a 30-month driving-under-the-influence 
program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety 
Code, if available in the county of the person’s residence or employment. 
(B) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to continue 
satisfactory participation in the program described in subparagraph (A). 
(C) The person submits the “Verification of Installation” form described 
in paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of Section 13386. 
(D) The person agrees to maintain the ignition interlock device as 
required under subdivision (g) of Section 23575. 
(E) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in 
Section 16430. 
(F) The person pays all administrative fees or reissue fees and any 
restriction fee required by the department. 
(G) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in 
subdivision (f) of Section 23575. 
(7) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of 
a violation of Section 23152 punishable under Section 23546, and if the 
97 

--- p132
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
person was found to be under the influence of any drug or the combined 
influence of any drug and an alcoholic beverage, the privilege shall be 
revoked for a period of three years. The privilege may not be reinstated 
until the person files proof of financial responsibility and gives proof 
satisfactory to the department of successful completion of an 18-month 
driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of 
the Health and Safety Code, as described in subdivision (b) or (c) of 
Section 23548, or, if available in the county of the person’s residence or 
employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed 
pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, or a program 
specified in Section 8001 of the Penal Code. For the purposes of this 
paragraph, enrollment in, participation in, and completion of an approved 
program shall be subsequent to the date of the current violation. Credit 
shall not be given to any program activities completed prior to the date of 
the current violation. The department shall advise the person that after 
completion of 12 months of the revocation period, which may include 
credit for a suspension period served under subdivision (c) of Section 
13353.3, the person may apply to the department for a restricted driver’s 
license, subject to the following conditions: 
(A) The person has satisfactorily completed, subsequent to the violation 
date of the current underlying conviction, either of the following: 
(i) The initial 12 months of an 18-month driving-under-the-influence 
program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety 
Code. 
(ii) The initial 12 months of a 30-month driving-under-the-influence 
program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety 
Code, if available in the county of the person’s residence or employment, 
and the person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to continue 
satisfactory participation in the 30-month driving-under-the-influence 
program. 
(B) The person submits the “Verification of Installation” form described 
in paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of Section 13386. 
(C) The person agrees to maintain the ignition interlock device as 
required under subdivision (g) of Section 23575. 
(D) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in 
Section 16430. 
(E) An individual convicted of a violation of Section 23152 punishable 
under Section 23546 may also, at any time after sentencing, petition the 
court for referral to an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program 
licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, or, if 
available in the county of the person’s residence or employment, a 30­
month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 
11836 of the Health and Safety Code. Unless good cause is shown, the 
court shall order the referral. 
(F) The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any 
restriction fee required by the department. 
(G) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in 
subdivision (f) of Section 23575. 
(8) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of 
a violation of Section 23153 punishable under Section 23550.5 or 23566, 
the privilege shall be revoked for a period of five years. The privilege may 
not be reinstated until the person gives proof of financial responsibility and 
proof satisfactory to the department of successful completion of one of the 
98 

--- p133
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
following programs: an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program 
licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, as 
described in subdivision (b) of Section 23568 or, if available in the county 
of the person’s residence or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the­
influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and 
Safety Code, or a program specified in Section 8001 of the Penal Code. 
For the purposes of this paragraph, enrollment in, participation in, and 
completion of an approved program shall be subsequent to the date of the 
current violation. Credit shall not be given to any program activities 
completed prior to the date of the current violation. The department shall 
advise the person that after the completion of 12 months of the revocation 
period, which may include credit for a suspension period served under 
subdivision (c) of Section 13353.3, the person may apply to the department 
for a restricted driver’s license, subject to the following conditions: 
(A) The person has satisfactorily completed, subsequent to the violation 
date of the current underlying conviction, either of the following: 
(i) The initial 12 months of a 30-month driving-under-the-influence 
program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety 
Code, if available in the county of the person’s residence or employment, 
and the person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to continue 
satisfactory participation in the 30-month driving-under-the-influence 
program. 
(ii) The initial 12 months of an 18-month driving-under-the-influence 
program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety 
Code, if a 30-month program is unavailable in the person’s county of 
residence or employment. 
(B) The person submits the “Verification of Installation” form described 
in paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of Section 13386. 
(C) The person agrees to maintain the ignition interlock device as 
required under subdivision (g) of Section 23575. 
(D) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in 
Section 16430. 
(E) An individual convicted of a violation of Section 23153 punishable 
under Section 23566 may also, at any time after sentencing, petition the 
court for referral to an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program or, 
if available in the county of the person’s residence or employment, a 30­
month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 
11836 of the Health and Safety Code. Unless good cause is shown, the 
court shall order the referral. 
(F) The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any 
restriction fee required by the department. 
(G) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in 
subdivision (f) of Section 23575. 
(9) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of 
a violation of Section 23152 punishable under Section 23550 or 23550.5, 
or Section 23153 punishable under Section 23550.5 the privilege shall be 
revoked for a period of four years. The privilege may not be reinstated 
until the person gives proof of financial responsibility and proof 
satisfactory to the department of successful completion of one of the 
following programs: an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program 
licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, or, if 
available in the county of the person’s residence or employment, a 30­
month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 
99 

--- p134
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
11836 of the Health and Safety Code, or a program specified in Section 
8001 of the Penal Code. For the purposes of this paragraph, enrollment in, 
participation in, and completion of an approved program shall be 
subsequent to the date of the current violation. Credit shall not be given to 
any program activities completed prior to the date of the current violation. 
The department shall advise the person that after the completion of 12 
months of the revocation period, which may include credit for a suspension 
period served under subdivision (c) of Section 13353.3, the person may 
apply to the department for a restricted driver’s license, subject to the 
following conditions: 
(A) The person has satisfactorily completed, subsequent to the violation 
date of the current underlying conviction, either of the following: 
(i) The initial 12 months of an 18-month driving-under-the-influence 
program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety 
Code. 
(ii) The initial 12 months of a 30-month driving-under-the-influence 
program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety 
Code, if available in the county of the person’s residence or employment, 
and the person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to continue 
satisfactory participation in the 30-month driving-under-the-influence 
program. 
(B) The person submits the “Verification of Installation” form described 
in paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of Section 13386. 
(C) The person agrees to maintain the ignition interlock device as 
required under subdivision (g) of Section 23575. 
(D) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in 
Section 16430. 
(E) An individual convicted of a violation of Section 23152 punishable 
under Section 23550 may also, at any time after sentencing, petition the 
court for referral to an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program or, 
if available in the county of the person’s residence or employment, a 30­
month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 
11836 of the Health and Safety Code. Unless good cause is shown, the 
court shall order the referral. 
(F) The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any 
restriction fee required by the department. 
(G) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in 
subdivision (f) of Section 23575. 
(10) Upon a conviction or finding of a violation of subdivision (a) of 
Section 23109 that is punishable under subdivision (e) of that section or 
Section 23109.1, the privilege shall be suspended for a period of 90 days to 
six months, if ordered by the court. The privilege may not be reinstated 
until the person gives proof of financial responsibility, as defined in 
Section 16430. 
(11) Upon a conviction or finding of a violation of subdivision (a) of 
Section 23109 that is punishable under subdivision (f) of that section, the 
privilege shall be suspended for a period of six months, if ordered by the 
court. The privilege may not be reinstated until the person gives proof of 
financial responsibility, as defined in Section 16430. 
(b) For the purpose of paragraphs (2) to (11), inclusive, of subdivision 
(a), the finding of the juvenile court judge, the juvenile hearing officer, or 
the referee of a juvenile court of a commission of a violation of Section 
100 

--- p135
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
23152 or 23153 or subdivision (a) of Section 23109 or Section 23109.1, as 
specified in subdivision (a) of this section, is a conviction. 
(c) A judge of a juvenile court, juvenile hearing officer, or referee of a 
juvenile court shall immediately report the findings specified in 
subdivision (a) to the department. 
(d) A conviction of an offense in a state, territory, or possession of the 
United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto 
Rico, or Canada that, if committed in this state, would be a violation of 
Section 23152, is a conviction of Section 23152 for the purposes of this 
section, and a conviction of an offense that, if committed in this state, 
would be a violation of Section 23153, is a conviction of Section 23153 for 
the purposes of this section. The department shall suspend or revoke the 
privilege to operate a motor vehicle pursuant to this section upon receiving 
notice of that conviction. 
(e) For the purposes of the restriction conditions specified in paragraphs 
(3) to (9), inclusive, of subdivision (a), the department shall terminate the 
restriction imposed pursuant to this section and shall suspend or revoke the 
person’s driving privilege upon receipt of notification from the driving­
under-the-influence program that the person has failed to comply with the 
program requirements. The person’s driving privilege shall remain 
suspended or revoked for the remaining period of the original suspension 
or revocation imposed under this section and until all reinstatement 
requirements described in this section are met.  
(f) For the purposes of this section, completion of a program is the 
following: 
(1) Satisfactory completion of all program requirements approved 
pursuant to program licensure, as evidenced by a certificate of completion 
issued, under penalty of perjury, by the licensed program. 
(2) Certification, under penalty of perjury, by the director of a program 
specified in Section 8001 of the Penal Code, that the person has completed 
a program specified in Section 8001 of the Penal Code. 
(g) The holder of a commercial driver’s license who was operating a 
commercial motor vehicle, as defined in Section 15210, at the time of a 
violation that resulted in a suspension or revocation of the person’s 
noncommercial driving privilege under this section is not eligible for the 
restricted driver’s license authorized under paragraphs (3) to (9), inclusive, 
of subdivision (a). 
SEC. 2. Section 13352.5 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 
13352.5. (a) The department shall issue a restricted driver’s license to a 
person whose driver’s license was suspended under paragraph (3) of 
subdivision (a) of Section 13352, if all of the following requirements have 
been met: 
(1) Proof satisfactory to the department of enrollment in, or completion 
of, a driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 
11836 of the Health and Safety Code, as described in subdivision (b) of 
Section 23542 has been received in the department’s headquarters. 
(2) The person submits proof of financial responsibility, as described in 
Section 16430. 
(3) The person completes not less than 90 days of the suspension period 
imposed under paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) of Section 13352. The 90 
days may include credit for any suspension period served under 
subdivision (c) of Section 13353.3. 
101 

--- p136
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
(4) The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any 
restriction fee required by the department. 
(b) The restriction of the driving privilege shall become effective when 
the department receives all of the documents and fees required under 
subdivision (a) and shall remain in effect until the final day of the original 
suspension imposed under paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) of Section 
13352, or until the date all reinstatement requirements described in Section 
13352 have been met, whichever date is later. 
(c) The restriction of the driving privilege shall be limited to the hours 
necessary for driving to and from the person’s place of employment, 
driving during the course of employment, and driving to and from 
activities required in the driving-under-the-influence program. 
(d) Whenever the driving privilege is restricted under this section, proof 
of financial responsibility, as defined in Section 16430, shall be maintained 
for three years. If the person does not maintain that proof of financial 
responsibility at any time during the restriction, the driving privilege shall 
be suspended until the proof required under Section 16484 is received by 
the department. 
(e) For the purposes of this section, enrollment in, participation in, and 
completion of an approved program shall be subsequent to the date of the 
current violation. Credit shall not be given to any program activities 
completed prior to the date of the current violation.  
(f) The department shall terminate the restriction imposed pursuant to 
this section and shall suspend the privilege to drive under paragraph (3) of 
subdivision (a) of Section 13352 upon receipt of notification from the 
driving-under-the-influence program that the person has failed to comply 
with the program requirements. 
(g) If, upon conviction, the court has made the determination, as 
authorized under subdivision (b) of Section 23540 or subdivision (d) of 
Section 23542, to disallow the issuance of a restricted driver’s license, the 
department shall not issue a restricted driver’s license under this section. 
(h) A person restricted pursuant to this section may apply to the 
department for a restricted driver’s license, subject to the conditions 
specified in paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) of Section 13352. Whenever 
proof of financial responsibility has already been provided and a restriction 
fee has been paid in compliance with restrictions described in this section, 
and the offender subsequently receives an ignition interlock device 
restriction described in paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) of Section 13352, 
the proof of financial responsibility period shall not be extended beyond 
the previously established term and no additional restriction fee shall be 
required. 
(i) This section applies to a person who meets all of the following 
conditions: 
(1) Has been convicted of a violation of Section 23152 that occurred on 
or before July 1, 1999, and is punishable under Section 23540, or former 
Section 23165. 
(2) Was granted probation for the conviction subject to conditions 
imposed under subdivision (b) of Section 23542, or under subdivision (b) 
of former Section 23166. 
(3) Is no longer subject to the probation described in paragraph (2). 
(4) Has not completed the licensed driving-under-the-influence program 
under paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) of Section 13352 for reinstatement 
of the driving privilege. 
102 

--- p137
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
(5) Has no violations in his or her driving record that would preclude 
issuance of a restricted driver’s license. 
SEC. 3. Section 23109 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 
23109. (a) A person shall not engage in a motor vehicle speed contest on 
a highway. As used in this section, a motor vehicle speed contest includes 
a motor vehicle race against another vehicle, a clock, or other timing 
device. For purposes of this section, an event in which the time to cover a 
prescribed route of more than 20 miles is measured, but where the vehicle 
does not exceed the speed limits, is not a speed contest. 
(b) A person shall not aid or abet in any motor vehicle speed contest on 
any highway. 
(c) A person shall not engage in a motor vehicle exhibition of speed on a 
highway, and a person shall not aid or abet in a motor vehicle exhibition of 
speed on any highway. 
(d) A person shall not, for the purpose of facilitating or aiding or as an 
incident to any motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition upon a highway, 
in any manner obstruct or place a barricade or obstruction or assist or 
participate in placing a barricade or obstruction upon any highway. 
(e) (1) A person convicted of a violation of subdivision (a) shall be 
punished by imprisonment in a county jail for not less than 24 hours nor 
more than 90 days or by a fine of not less than three hundred fifty-five 
dollars ($355) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both that 
fine and imprisonment. That person shall also be required to perform 40 
hours of community service. The court may order the privilege to operate a 
motor vehicle suspended for 90 days to six months, as provided in 
paragraph (10) of subdivision (a) of Section 13352. The person’s privilege 
to operate a motor vehicle may be restricted for 90 days to six months to 
necessary travel to and from that person’s place of employment and, if 
driving a motor vehicle is necessary to perform the duties of the person’s 
employment, restricted to driving in that person’s scope of employment. 
This subdivision does not interfere with the court’s power to grant 
probation in a suitable case. 
(2) If a person is convicted of a violation of subdivision (a) and that 
violation proximately causes bodily injury to a person other than the 
driver, the person convicted shall be punished by imprisonment in a county 
jail for not less than 30 days nor more than six months or by a fine of not 
less than five hundred dollars ($500) nor more than one thousand dollars 
($1,000), or by both that fine and imprisonment. 
(f) (1) If a person is convicted of a violation of subdivision (a) for an 
offense that occurred within five years of the date of a prior offense that 
resulted in a conviction of a violation of subdivision (a), that person shall 
be punished by imprisonment in a county jail for not less than four days 
nor more than six months, and by a fine of not less than five hundred 
dollars ($500) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000). 
(2) If the perpetration of the most recent offense within the five-year 
period described in paragraph (1) proximately causes bodily injury to a 
person other than the driver, a person convicted of that second violation 
shall be imprisoned in a county jail for not less than 30 days nor more than 
six months and by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500) nor 
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000). 
(3) If the perpetration of the most recent offense within the five-year 
period described in paragraph (1) proximately causes serious bodily injury, 
as defined in paragraph (4) of subdivision (f) of Section 243 of the Penal 
103 

--- p138
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
Code, to a person other than the driver, a person convicted of that second 
violation shall be imprisoned in the state prison, or in a county jail for not 
less than 30 days nor more than one year, and by a fine of not less than five 
hundred dollars ($500) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000). 
(4) The court shall order the privilege to operate a motor vehicle of a 
person convicted under paragraph (1), (2), or (3) suspended for a period of 
six months, as provided in paragraph (11) of subdivision (a) of Section 
13352. In lieu of the suspension, the person’s privilege to operate a motor 
vehicle may be restricted for six months to necessary travel to and from 
that person’s place of employment and, if driving a motor vehicle is 
necessary to perform the duties of the person’s employment, restricted to 
driving in that person’s scope of employment. 
(5) This subdivision does not interfere with the court’s power to grant 
probation in a suitable case. 
(g) If the court grants probation to a person subject to punishment under 
subdivision (f), in addition to subdivision (f) and any other terms and 
conditions imposed by the court, which may include a fine, the court shall 
impose as a condition of probation that the person be confined in a county 
jail for not less than 48 hours nor more than six months. The court shall 
order the person’s privilege to operate a motor vehicle to be suspended for 
a period of six months, as provided in paragraph (11) of subdivision (a) of 
Section 13352 or restricted pursuant to subdivision (f). 
(h) If a person is convicted of a violation of subdivision (a) and the 
vehicle used in the violation is registered to that person, the vehicle may be 
impounded at the registered owner’s expense for not less than one day nor 
more than 30 days. 
(i) A person who violates subdivision (b), (c), or (d) shall upon 
conviction of that violation be punished by imprisonment in a county jail 
for not more than 90 days, by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars 
($500), or by both that fine and imprisonment. 
(j) If a person’s privilege to operate a motor vehicle is restricted by a 
court pursuant to this section, the court shall clearly mark the restriction 
and the dates of the restriction on that person’s driver’s license and 
promptly notify the Department of Motor Vehicles of the terms of the 
restriction in a manner prescribed by the department. The Department of 
Motor Vehicles shall place that restriction in the person’s records in the 
Department of Motor Vehicles and enter the restriction on a license 
subsequently issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles to that person 
during the period of the restriction. 
(k) The court may order that a person convicted under this section, who 
is to be punished by imprisonment in a county jail, be imprisoned on days 
other than days of regular employment of the person, as determined by the 
court. 
(l) This section shall be known and may be cited as the Louis Friend 
Memorial Act. SEC. 4. Section 23550 of the Vehicle Code is amended to 
read: 23550. (a) If a person is convicted of a violation of Section 23152 
and the offense occurred within 10 years of three or more separate 
violations of Section 23103, as specified in Section 23103.5, or Section 
23152 or 23153, or any combination thereof, that resulted in convictions, 
that person shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison, or in a 
county jail for not less than 180 days nor more than one year, and by a fine 
of not less than three hundred ninety dollars ($390) nor more than one 
thousand dollars ($1,000). The person’s privilege to operate a motor 
104 

--- p139
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
vehicle shall be revoked by the Department of Motor Vehicles pursuant to 
paragraph (9) of subdivision (a) of Section 13352. The court shall require 
the person to surrender the driver’s license to the court in accordance with 
Section 13550. 
(b) A person convicted of a violation of Section 23152 punishable under 
this section shall be designated as a habitual traffic offender for a period of 
three years, subsequent to the conviction. The person shall be advised of 
this designation pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 13350. 
SEC. 5. Section 23550.5 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 
23550.5. (a) A person is guilty of a public offense, punishable by 
imprisonment in the state prison or confinement in a county jail for not 
more than one year and by a fine of not less than three hundred ninety 
dollars ($390) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) if that person is 
convicted of a violation of Section 23152 or 23153, and the offense 
occurred within 10 years of any of the following: 
(1) A prior violation of Section 23152 that was punished as a felony 
under Section 23550 or this section, or both, or under former Section 
23175 or former Section 23175.5, or both. 
(2) A prior violation of Section 23153 that was punished as a felony. 
(3) A prior violation of paragraph (1) of subdivision (c) of Section 192 
of the Penal Code that was punished as a felony. 
(b) Each person who, having previously been convicted of a violation of 
subdivision (a) of Section 191.5 of the Penal Code, a felony violation of 
subdivision (b) of Section 191.5, or a violation of subdivision (a) of 
Section 192.5 of the Penal Code, is subsequently convicted of a violation 
of Section 23152 or 23153 is guilty of a public offense punishable by 
imprisonment in the state prison or confinement in a county jail for not 
more than one year and by a fine of not less than three hundred ninety 
dollars ($390) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000). 
(c) The privilege to operate a motor vehicle of a person convicted of a 
violation that is punishable under subdivision (a) or (b) shall be revoked by 
the department under paragraph (9) of subdivision (a) of Section 13352, 
unless paragraph (8) of subdivision (a) of Section 13352 is also applicable, 
in which case the privilege shall be revoked under that provision. The 
court shall require the person to surrender the driver’s license to the court 
in accordance with Section 13550. 
(d) A person convicted of a violation of Section 23152 or 23153 that is 
punishable under this section shall be designated as a habitual traffic 
offender for a period of three years, subsequent to the conviction. The 
person shall be advised of this designation under subdivision (b) of Section 
13350. 
SEC. 6. Section 23552 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 
23552. (a) (1) If the court grants probation to a person punished under 
Section 23550, in addition to the provisions of Section 23600 and any 
other terms and conditions imposed by the court, the court shall impose as 
conditions of probation that the person be confined in a county jail for at 
least 180 days but not more than one year and pay a fine of at least three 
hundred ninety dollars ($390) but not more than one thousand dollars 
($1,000). 
(2) The person’s privilege to operate a motor vehicle shall be revoked by 
the department under paragraph (9) of subdivision (a) of Section 13352. 
The court shall require the person to surrender the driver’s license to the 
court in accordance with Section 13550. 
105 

--- p140
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
(b) In addition to subdivision (a), if the court grants probation to any 
person punished under Section 23550, the court may order as a condition 
of probation that the person participate, for at least 30 months subsequent 
to the underlying conviction and in a manner satisfactory to the court, in a 
driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of 
the Health and Safety Code. In lieu of the minimum term of imprisonment 
in subdivision (a), the court shall impose as a condition of probation under 
this subdivision that the person be confined in the county jail for at least 30 
days but not more than one year. The court shall not order the treatment 
prescribed by this subdivision unless the person makes a specific request 
and shows good cause for the order, whether or not the person has 
previously completed a treatment program pursuant to subdivision (b) of 
Section 23542 or paragraph (4) of subdivision (b) of Section 23562. In 
order to enable all required persons to participate, each person shall pay 
the program costs commensurate with the person’s ability to pay as 
determined pursuant to Section 11837.4 of the Health and Safety Code. No 
condition of probation required pursuant to this subdivision is a basis for 
reducing any other probation requirement in this section or Section 23600 
or for avoiding the mandatory license revocation provisions of paragraph 
(9) of subdivision (a) of Section 13352. 
(c) In addition to Section 23600 and subdivision (a), if the court grants 
probation to any person punished under Section 23550 who has not 
previously completed a treatment program pursuant to subdivision (b) of 
Section 23542 or paragraph (4) of subdivision (b) of Section 23562, and 
unless the person is ordered to participate in, and complete, a program 
under subdivision (b), the court shall impose as a condition of probation 
that the person, subsequent to the date of the current violation, enroll in 
and participate, for at least 18 months and in a manner satisfactory to the 
court, in a driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 
Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, as designated by the court. 
The person shall complete the entire program subsequent to, and shall not 
be given any credit for program activities completed prior to, the date of 
the current violation. A person who has previously completed a 12-month 
or 18-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 
Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code shall not be eligible for 
referral pursuant to this subdivision unless a 30-month driving-under-the­
influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and 
Safety Code is not available for referral in the county of the person’s 
residence or employment. A condition of probation required pursuant to 
this subdivision is not a basis for reducing any other probation requirement 
in this section or Section 23600 or for avoiding the mandatory license 
revocation provisions of paragraph (9) of subdivision (a) of Section 13352. 
(d) The court shall advise the person at the time of sentencing that the 
driving privilege may not be restored until the person provides proof 
satisfactory to the department of successful completion of a driving-under­
the-influence program of the length required under this code that is 
licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code. 
SEC. 7. Section 23566 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 
23566. (a) If a person is convicted of a violation of Section 23153 and 
the offense occurred within 10 years of two or more separate violations of 
Section 23103, as specified in Section 23103.5, or Section 23152 or 23153, 
or any combination of these violations, that resulted in convictions, that 
person shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for a term of 
106 

--- p141
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
two, three, or four years and by a fine of not less than one thousand fifteen 
dollars ($1,015) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000). The 
person’s privilege to operate a motor vehicle shall be revoked by the 
Department of Motor Vehicles pursuant to paragraph (8) of subdivision (a) 
of Section 13352. The court shall require the person to surrender the 
driver’s license to the court in accordance with Section 13550. 
(b) If a person is convicted of a violation of Section 23153, and the act 
or neglect proximately causes great bodily injury, as defined in Section 
12022.7 of the Penal Code, to any person other than the driver, and the 
offense occurred within 10 years of two or more separate violations of 
Section 23103, as specified in Section 23103.5, or Section 23152 or 23153, 
or any combination of these violations, that resulted in convictions, that 
person shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for a term of 
two, three, or four years and by a fine of not less than one thousand fifteen 
dollars ($1,015) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000). The 
person’s privilege to operate a motor vehicle shall be revoked by the 
Department of Motor Vehicles pursuant to paragraph (8) of subdivision (a) 
of Section 13352. The court shall require the person to surrender the 
driver’s license to the court in accordance with Section 13550. 
(c) If a person is convicted under subdivision (b), and the offense for 
which the person is convicted occurred within 10 years of four or more 
separate violations of Section 23103, as specified in Section 23103.5, or 
Section 23152 or 23153, or any combination of these violations, that 
resulted in convictions, that person shall, in addition and consecutive to the 
sentences imposed under subdivision (b), be punished by an additional 
term of imprisonment in the state prison for three years. 
The enhancement allegation provided in this subdivision shall be 
pleaded and proved as provided by law. 
(d) A person convicted of Section 23153 punishable under this section 
shall be designated as a habitual traffic offender for a period of three years, 
subsequent to the conviction. The person shall be advised of this 
designation pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 13350. 
(e) A person confined in state prison under this section shall be ordered 
by the court to participate in an alcohol or drug program, or both, that is 
available at the prison during the person’s confinement. Completion of an 
alcohol or drug program under this section does not meet the program 
completion requirement of paragraph (8) of subdivision (a) of Section 
13352, unless the drug or alcohol program is licensed under Section 11836 
of the Health and Safety Code, or is a program specified in Section 8001 of 
the Penal Code. 
SEC. 8. Section 23568 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 
23568. (a) If the court grants probation to a person punished under 
Section 23566, in addition to the provisions of Section 23600 and any 
other terms and conditions imposed by the court, the court shall impose as 
conditions of probation that the person be confined in the county jail for at 
least one year, that the person pay a fine of at least three hundred ninety 
dollars ($390) but not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000), and that 
the person make restitution or reparation pursuant to Section 1203.1 of the 
Penal Code. The person’s privilege to operate a motor vehicle shall be 
revoked by the department under paragraph (8) of subdivision (a) of 
Section 13352. The court shall require the person to surrender the driver’s 
license to the court in accordance with Section 13550. 
107 

--- p142
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Deterrent Evaluation of the Ignition Interlock Pilot Program in California 
(b) In addition to Section 23600 and subdivision (a), if the court grants 
probation to a person punished under Section 23566, the court shall impose 
as a condition of probation that the person enroll in and complete, 
subsequent to the date of the underlying violation and in a manner 
satisfactory to the court, an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program 
licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code or, if 
available in the county of the person’s residence or employment, a 30­
month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 
11836 of the Health and Safety Code, as designated by the court. The 
person shall complete the entire program subsequent to, and shall not be 
given any credit for program activities completed prior to, the date of the 
current violation. In lieu of the minimum term of imprisonment in 
subdivision (a), the court shall impose as a minimum condition of 
probation under this subdivision that the person be confined in the county 
jail for at least 30 days but not more than one year. Except as provided in 
this subdivision, if the court grants probation under this section, the court 
shall order the treatment prescribed by this subdivision, whether or not the 
person has previously completed a treatment program pursuant to 
subdivision (b) of Section 23542 or paragraph (4) of subdivision (b) of 
Section 23562. In order to enable all required persons to participate, each 
person shall pay the program costs commensurate with the person’s ability 
to pay as determined pursuant to Section 11837.4 of the Health and Safety 
Code. No condition of probation required pursuant to this subdivision is a 
basis for reducing any other probation requirement in this section or 
Section 23600 or for avoiding the mandatory license revocation provisions 
of paragraph (8) of subdivision (a) of Section 13352. 
(c) The court shall advise the person at the time of sentencing that the 
driving privilege may not be restored until the person provides proof 
satisfactory to the department of successful completion of a driving-under­
the-influence program of the length required under this code that is 
licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code. 
SEC. 9. This act shall become operative on July 1, 2010. 
O 
108 
