=== página original 7 ===
 
 
Stormwater Trash Capture Feasibility Report 
 
 
  
 
June 2022 
7 
Schaaf & Wheeler  
CONSULTING CIVIL ENGINEERS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baffle boxes are concrete or fiberglass structures containing a series of sediment settling 
chambers separated by baffles. The primary function of baffle boxes is to remove sediment, 
suspended particles, and associated pollutants from stormwater. Trash is removed through the 
metal cage with 5mm mesh 
located at the flow line of the 
storm drain system. Baffle boxes 
can be located either in-line or at 
the end of storm pipes. 
 
Cleaning of baffle boxes can be 
accessed through a manhole or 
hatch above ground with a vacuum 
truck, with no confined spaced 
entry required for servicing. 
Screened systems are hinged for 
easy access to collected sediments 
in the baffle chambers below.  
 
2.1.2 Louvered Panels 
Louvered panels can be used in small scale and large scale applications. The most common 
louvered panel is the Rosco Moss Storm Flo® pictured below on the left. Louvered panels can 
also be used in sites that don’t have a traditional catch basin and are sold by several 
manufacturers in just flat panel sheets of 5mm openings. The screen can be used to span 
across a channel of irregular shape or at the outfall of a pump station as shown below on the 
right in a zig zag formation to increase opening.  
 

=== página original 8 ===
 
 
Stormwater Trash Capture Feasibility Report 
 
 
  
 
June 2022 
8 
Schaaf & Wheeler  
CONSULTING CIVIL ENGINEERS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1.3 Small Scale Devices 
Small scale devices include structures such as connector pipe screens and hanging baskets 
installed at storm drain inlets. For each large-scale device, we have prepared cost estimates for 
the equivalent trash capture using small scale devices. However, the small scale devices do not 
capture the Caltrans runoff as small-scale devices cannot be located on the major trunklines.  
 
The connector pipe screen is a metal screen 
assembly installed inside a catch basin, in front of 
the outlet pipe, preventing debris from entering the 
storm drain system. They are designed to be 
permanently mounted to the catch basin or have a 
quick disconnect feature to facilitate pipe jetting or 
to prevent flooding should the basin drainage 
system become clogged. These units are designed 
to retain all trash and solids larger than 5 mm 
inside the catch basin, and once in place, it also 
retains large volumes of sediment. Therefore, the 
trash capture and storage capacity of this product 
are dependent upon the size of the catch basin where it is installed.  
 
The hanging basket is similar to the connector pipe 
screen in that it is a separate unit that is installed into 
the storm drain system. Typically, installed in a catch 
basin, the hanging basket is an insert that keeps trash 
and large debris from entering the stormwater 
system. A frame is inserted into the top of the catch 
basin and is paired with a basket made with 5mm 
opening perforations. The large screen openings allow 
ample flow through and will not clog from sand and 
sediment loading off streets and parking lots.   
Inlet screens are desirable because they can be 
installed relatively quickly and at a relatively low cost.  
 
 

=== página original 9 ===
 
 
Stormwater Trash Capture Feasibility Report 
 
 
  
 
June 2022 
9 
Schaaf & Wheeler  
CONSULTING CIVIL ENGINEERS 
 
3. Cost Estimates and Maintenance Considerations 
3.1 Unit Costs 
The following assumptions were made in determining construction costs for each proposed 
device: 
• 
Installation costs for large-scale HDS and baffle devices are assumed to be 4 times the 
cost of the device;   
• 
Installation of netting large-scale devices are assumed to be 3 times the cost of the 
device; 
• 
Installation of louvered panels was calculated on a case-by-case basis as they are 
custom installations; 
• 
Hydrodynamic separators and baffle boxes capital cost is estimated at $3000 per 
treatment flow rate (cfs) based on recent bids; 
• 
Netting and large screen device capital costs are estimated at $2500 per treatment flow 
rate (cfs) based on recent bids; 
• 
Small scale devices (i.e. inlet screens and hanging baskets) were estimated at $2,500 
per device, based on recent quotes; 
• 
The devices are located in areas which do not require major utility relocation, property 
or easement acquisition or environmental permitting; 
• 
Large scale devices were assumed to have a lifetime of 50-years; 
• 
Small scale devices were assumed to have a lifetime of 25-years; 
• 
Total Base Cost is presented in the 2022 construction year dollars and includes 
installation, construction needed to update drainage infrastructure to support trash 
capture device, and the device. It does not include maintenance or device replacement;  
• 
20% construction contingency added to total costs 
• 
15% design added 
• 
Permitting costs were estimated for each specific site location. 
Table 4-1 lists the unit costs used to develop each of the site’s installation cost. Attachment 3 
contains details of each site quantities and total cost.  
 

=== página original 10 ===
 
 
Stormwater Trash Capture Feasibility Report 
 
 
  
 
June 2022 
10 
Schaaf & Wheeler  
CONSULTING CIVIL ENGINEERS 
 
Table 3-1: Unit Cost Assumptions 
Item 
Cost per Unit 
Unit 
HDS or Baffle 
$3,000 
per cfs 
Netting Device 
$2,500 
per cfs 
Louvered Panel 
$500  
SF 
Connector Pipe Screen 
$2,500  
each 
Permitting for Underground  
$27,000 
lump sum 
Permitting for in channel 
$105,000 - $120,000 
lump sum 
 
3.2 Maintenance Considerations  
Cleaning and maintenance costs are not included in the installation costs. They are provided in 
this section for reference only for the MCSTOPPP consideration. Maintenance of both small-and 
large-scale devices can be done by municipal staff or hired out to a cleaning contractor. In the 
Bay Area, there is a mix of jurisdictions that perform maintenance in-house and those that 
contract out the maintenance.  
 
For cleaning, replacement, and maintenance, the following considerations should be taken: 
• 
Large scale HDS or baffle box devices are cleaned approximately three (3) times a year, 
requiring 8 hours of a team of two staff members at $100/hour, a vacuum truck at 
$400/hour, or $23,400/device annually; 
• 
Netting devices are cleaned approximately three (3) times a year, requiring 8 hours of a 
team of two staff members at $100/hour, a crane truck at $5,000/half day, replacement 
net at $1,500, or $27,300/device annually; 
• 
Louvered panels at the Rossi pump station are cleaned approximately three (3) times a 
year, requiring 4 hours of a team of two staff members at $100/hour, a vacuum truck at 
$400/hour, or $7,200/device annually; 
• 
Inlet screens are cleaned approximately three (3) times a year, requiring 4 hours of a 
team of two maintenance workers at $100/hour- or $7,200/device annually; 

=== página original 25 ===
CONCEPTUAL DESIGN - POTENTIAL FULL TRASH SYSTEM PROJECT   
  
MCSTOPPP Full Trash Capture Feasibility Evaluation 
June 2022 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project ID: MV-037-Alt1 
Project Name:  Miller Avenue 
Project Location: City of Mill Valley (37.8931, -122.5306) 
Site/Device Information 
Proposed Device Type:  Louvered Panel Gross Solid Removal Device (GSRD) (See 
page 2 for Alternatives) 
Project Description:  Construction of a custom louvered 5-mm GSRD panel screen 
across the concrete channel that is 10-foot in width. The panel screen will be sited 
directly downstream of where the underground box culvert daylights in the median 
on Miller Avenue. The custom panel screen will be roughly 24 inches in height and 
constructed with a 6-inch weir to allow overflow to occur and avoid flooding during 
large storms.  Once the full capture, 1-yr, 1hr design flow is exceeded, flows in the 
channel will overflow the screen via the weir.  
Site Specific Considerations: 
• 
Location is likely tidal and known to flood 
• 
There is ample space in median for maintenance and operation of the 
louvered panel 
• 
Mature trees in the median would need to be avoided during construction and 
maintenance 
O&M Summary: Device will be accessible via the turn lane on Miller Avenue. 
Comments/Notes: The project may require permission from the Water Board to install 
a device in the channel, however it is believed the channel is not a creek and can 
be considered part of the City’s storm drain system. The project does not receive any 
drainage from Caltrans’ jurisdictional area.  
Drainage Area and Trash Reduction Information 
Total Drainage Area:  29 acres 
• Mill Valley – 29 acres 
• Caltrans Right-of-Way – 0 acres 
Priority Land Use (PLU) Areas (acres):  
Public 
Agency 
Trash Generation 
Category 
Non- 
PLU 
Area 
Total 
Area 
Low 
Mod 
High 
Very 
High 
Mill Valley 
1 
2 
5 
3 
18 
29 
Caltrans 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
0 
1-yr/1-hr Peak Flow (modeled): 8 cfs 
Preliminary Cost Estimate 
Design/ 
Permitting 
$32,000 
Construction 
$12,000 
Construction 
Contingency 
$2,400 
Total Capital 
$56,000 
Annual Operation 
& Maintenance 
$7,200/yr 
Construction Cost 
per Acre of PLU 
$2,200/ac 
Proposed Project Location 
Proposed Project Location 

=== página original 48 ===
State Water Resources Control Board
CERTIFIED FULL CAPTURE SYSTEM LIST OF 
TRASH TREATMENT CONTROL DEVICES 
(Updated September 2021)
Trash Provisions 
In accordance with the Trash Provisions,1 all trash treatment control devices 
(Devices) installed after December 2, 2015 shall meet the Full Capture System 
definition2 and be certified by the State Water Resources Control Board (State Water 
Board) Executive Director, or designee, prior to installation. The Devices included on 
this list are either: 1) new Device applications certified by the State Water Board 
after adoption of the Trash Provisions, or 2) grandfathered device fact sheets listed 
by the San Francisco Regional Water Board prior to the adoption of the Trash 
Provisions. 
The Trash Provisions require that only Certified Full Capture Devices may be 
installed, and that the Devices be designed according to the following criteria:
1. Appropriately sized to treat not less than the peak flowrate resulting from a 
one--year, one-hour storm event (design storm) or at least the same peak flows 
from the corresponding storm drain;
2. Do not bypass trash below the design storm under maximum operational loading 
conditions; and
3. Trap all particles that are 5 mm or greater up to the design flow3 or at least the 
same peak flows from the corresponding storm drain; and do not have a 
1 Amendment to the Water Quality Control Plan for Ocean Waters of California to 
Control Trash and Part 1 Trash Provisions of the Water Quality Control Plan for Inland 
Surface Waters, Enclosed Bays, And Estuaries of California adopted by the State 
Water Board.
2 A Full Capture System is a treatment control, or series of treatment controls, including 
but not limited to, a multi-benefit project or a low-impact development control that traps 
all particles that are 5 mm or greater, and has a design treatment capacity that is 
either:  of not less than the peak flow rate, Q, resulting from a one-year, one-hour 
storm in the subdrainage area, or b) appropriately sized to, and designed to carry at 
least the same flows as, the corresponding storm drain.
3 The region specific one-year, one-hour storm (or design flow) may be obtained from 
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Precipitation Estimates 
(https://www.weather.gov/media/owp/oh/hdsc/docs/Atlas14_Volume6.pdf)

=== página original 49 ===
CERTIFIED FULL CAPTURE SYSTEM LIST OF
TRASH TREATMENT CONTROL DEVICES
2
diversion structure present upstream such that a portion of the peak flow is not 
treated to trap all particles 5-millimeter or greater.
Vector Control Accessibility
According to the California Health and Safety Code4, California landowners are 
legally responsible to abate (eliminate the source of) a public nuisance arising from 
their property, including mosquitoes. Mosquito vector control districts have 
substantial authority to access public and private property, inspect known or 
suspected sources of mosquitoes, abate mosquito sources, and charge the 
landowner for work performed and/or charge fees if a landowner is unwilling or 
unable to address a mosquito source arising from their property. 
Depending on its design, certain Devices may impede the mosquito vector control 
district’s ability to (1) visually inspect the Device and/or storm vault for mosquito 
breeding, and (2) apply the appropriate chemical treatment. Moreover, some devices 
may create a habitat for mosquitoes. Prior to installation of any certified Device, the 
local mosquito vector control district should be contacted to ensure the installation 
conforms to the district’s visual inspection, treatment, and vector breeding 
minimizing guidelines. The Mosquito Vector Control Association of California may 
also be contacted via email at Trashtreatment@mvcac.org.
New Device Application Certification or Fact Sheet Update
To apply for certification of a new Device, or to update a grandfathered Device fact 
sheet, the Device owner shall submit an application/fact sheet in accordance with 
the Trash Treatment Control Device Certification and Fact Sheet Update 
Requirements. Upon determining that a Device application is complete and meets 
the definition of a trash full capture system and is approved by the Mosquito Vector 
Control Association of California, the Executive Director will place the Device on the 
State Water Board’s Certified Full Capture System List of Trash Treatment Control 
Devices. 
The Trash Treatment Control Device Certification and Fact Sheet Update 
Requirements is found on the Trash Implementation Program webpage 
(https://www.waterboards.ca.gov/water_issues/programs/stormwater/trash_impleme
ntation.html).
Certification of any Device does not constitute an endorsement by the State 
Water Board. The Executive Director reserves the right to de-certify and 
remove any Device from this list that does not satisfy the requirements of the 
Trash Provisions, such as but not limited to when a Device is discontinued, 
found to not trap trash in accordance with the Trash Provisions, or no longer 
has Mosquito Vector Control Association of California approval.
4 Health & Safety Code sections 2001- 4(d); 2002; 2060 (b) and Health & Safety Code 
sections 2060-2067, 100170, and 100175.
