=== página 1 ===
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 2 ===
ii  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
The Environment Agency is the leading public body 
protecting and improving the environment in England and 
Wales. 
It’s our job to make sure that air, land and water are looked 
after by everyone in today’s society, so that tomorrow’s 
generations inherit a cleaner, healthier world. 
Our work includes tackling flooding and pollution incidents, 
reducing industry’s impacts on the environment, cleaning up 
rivers, coastal waters and contaminated land, and 
improving wildlife habitats. 
This report is the result of research commissioned by the 
Environment Agency’s Evidence Directorate and funded by 
the joint Environment Agency/Defra Flood and Coastal 
Erosion Risk Management Research and Development 
Programme. 
Published by: 
Environment Agency, Rio House, Waterside Drive, 
Aztec West, Almondsbury, Bristol, BS32 4UD 
Tel: 01454 624400  Fax: 01454 624409 
www.environment-agency.gov.uk  
 
ISBN:  978-1-84911-138-6 
 
© Environment Agency –  November, 2009 
 
All rights reserved. This document may be reproduced 
with prior permission of the Environment Agency. 
 
The views and statements expressed in this report are 
those of the author alone. The views or statements 
expressed in this publication do not necessarily 
represent the views of the Environment Agency and the 
Environment Agency cannot accept any responsibility for 
such views or statements. 
 
This report is printed on Cyclus Print, a 100% recycled 
stock, which is 100% post consumer waste and is totally 
chlorine free. Water used is treated and in most cases 
returned to source in better condition than removed.  
 
Email:fcerm.science@environment-agency.gov.uk 
 
Further copies of this summary are available from our 
publications catalogue: http://publications.environment-
agency.gov.uk  or our National Customer Contact 
Centre: T: 08708 506506  
E: enquiries@environment-agency.gov.uk. 
 
Author(s): 
Matthew Graham, Steve Magenis, David Ramsbottom, 
Charlie Rickard, Peter Robinson, Martin Whiting and 
Helena Wicks 
 
Dissemination Status: 
Released to all regions 
Publicly available 
 
Keywords: 
Flood risk management, trash, security, screen, debris 
load, asset management 
 
Research Contractor: 
Royal Haskoning, Rightwell House, Bretton, 
Peterborough, PE3 8DW 
Tel: 01733 334455 
 
Environment Agency’s Project Manager: 
Peter Robinson, Evidence Directorate
 
 
Product Code: 
SCHO1109BRHF-E-P 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 3 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
iii 
Evidence at the  
Environment Agency 
Evidence underpins the work of the Environment Agency. It provides an up-to-date 
understanding of the world about us, helps us to develop tools and techniques to 
monitor and manage our environment as efficiently and effectively as possible.  It also 
helps us to understand how the environment is change and to identify what the future 
pressures may be.   
The work of the Environment Agency’s Evidence Directorate is a key ingredient in the 
partnership between research, policy and operations that enables the Environment 
Agency to protect and restore our environment. 
The Research & Innovation programme focuses on four main areas of activity: 
• Setting the agenda, by informing our evidence-based policies, advisory and 
regulatory roles; 
• Maintaining scientific credibility, by ensuring that our programmes and 
projects are fit for purpose and executed according to international standards; 
• Carrying out research, either by contracting it out to research organisations 
and consultancies or by doing it ourselves; 
• Delivering information, advice, tools and techniques, by making 
appropriate products available to our policy and operations staff. 
 
 
Miranda Kavanagh 
Director of Evidence 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 4 ===
iv  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
Foreword 
This guide outlines current good practice for the design, assessment, management and 
operation of trash and security screens upstream of culverts in England and Wales. It 
updates and supersedes the Trash Screens: Design and Operation Manual, published 
by the Environment Agency (2002). That publication had itself updated and superseded 
National Rivers Authority (NRA) Publication P-126, Interim Guidance Notes for the 
Design and Operation of Trash Screens (1993). 
This guide promotes the use of a risk-based approach to assessing the requirement for 
and design and management of trash and security screens.  It is for use throughout the 
Environment Agency and we will encourage local authorities and others involved in the 
design and management of screens to follow this guidance to:  
• encourage asset managers, planners and designers to carefully consider 
the need for a screen, and to fully investigate alternative means of 
achieving the desired outcome and to ensure new screens are only 
provided where the benefits are significant and outweigh the risks;  
• provide a comprehensive guide to the planning and design of a screen, 
following confirmation of the decision that a screen is required;  
• provide guidance to owners and operators of screens on how they should 
be monitored, operated and maintained to ensure optimum performance. 
The conclusions and recommendations set out in this document are for guidance only 
and are not mandatory. All decisions regarding screens should be taken in the context 
of a particular site and after evaluation of the risks and options available. There is no 
such thing as a standard or universal design for a screen and the drawings and 
photographs are included to illustrate the principles only. 
In general, the Environment Agency wishes to discourage the use of any form of 
screen except where the benefits are significant and outweigh the risks. This guide 
should help to ensure that appropriate factors are taken into account in all stages of the 
decision-making process.  
 
Peter Robinson 
Technical Advisor (FCRM Asset Management) 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 5 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
v 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank the following for their contributions to this report: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. E. Rickard 
 
 
 
 
 
Independent Consultant 
 
Thanks are also extended to our staff both past and present, and too numerous to 
mention individually, who contributed to the 2009 and earlier editions of this guide. 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 6 ===
vi  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
Contents 
PART ONE – INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW 
1 
1 
Introduction 
2 
1.1 
Scope of the guide 
2 
1.2 
Use of this guide 
3 
1.3 
Context 
3 
1.4 
Role of the Environment Agency 
3 
1.5 
Key guidance 
4 
1.6 
Definitions 
4 
2 
Classification of screen types 
5 
2.1 
Trash screens 
5 
2.2 
Coarse debris (including boulders) screens 
5 
2.3 
General debris screens 
6 
2.4 
Combination of debris screens 
6 
2.5 
Security screens 
6 
PART TWO – ASSESSING THE NEED FOR A SCREEN 
7 
3 
Assessing need 
8 
3.1 
Identify the options 
8 
3.2 
Do nothing 
9 
3.3 
Reduce problem at source 
10 
3.4 
Install a screen 
10 
4 
Risk assessment and management 
13 
4.1 
Introduction to risk 
13 
4.2 
General hazards associated with screens 
13 
4.3 
Consultation and stakeholder engagement 
15 
4.4 
Risk issues – Trash screens 
15 
4.5 
Risk Issues – Security Screens 
21 
4.6 
Environmental risks 
26 
4.7 
Use of water level monitoring and CCTV to reduce risk 
26 
4.8 
Other operational risks 
28 
4.9 
Decision support – new screens 
28 
5 
Assessment of existing screens 
30 
5.1 
Reason for an assessment 
30 
5.2 
Criteria to be assessed 
30 
5.3 
Decision support – existing screens 
31 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 7 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
vii 
PART THREE – DESIGN, MONITORING AND OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS 33 
6 
Evaluation of potential debris load 
34 
6.1 
Types of debris 
34 
6.2 
Evaluation of the catchment 
35 
6.3 
Reduction of debris load and illegal dumping 
35 
6.4 
Sediment load 
37 
7 
Determination of screen area 
38 
7.1 
Components of a screen 
38 
7.2 
Screen area 
39 
7.3 
Estimation of required screen area 
40 
7.4 
Evidence-based method for determining screen area 
41 
7.5 
Screen layout 
44 
8 
Selection of optimum bar spacing 
45 
8.1 
Importance of bar spacing 
45 
8.2 
Bar spacing for security screens 
46 
8.3 
Bar spacing for trash screens 
47 
8.4 
Bar spacing for weed screens 
48 
8.5 
Bar spacing on existing screens 
48 
9 
Environmental consequences and opportunities 
49 
9.1 
Fish migration 
49 
9.2 
Aesthetic appearance 
49 
9.3 
Waste disposal 
50 
9.4 
Ecological status 
50 
10 
Hydraulic analysis 
51 
10.1 
The importance of hydraulic analysis 
51 
10.2 
Design criteria 
51 
10.3 
Hydraulic performance 
52 
10.4 
Approach to hydraulic analysis 
55 
10.5 
Design conditions 
55 
10.6 
Design process 
57 
10.7 
Screen layout 
57 
10.8 
Hydraulic calculation 
58 
10.9 
Hydraulic modelling 
59 
10.10 
Refinement of screen design 
62 
11 
Detailed design of a screen 
63 
11.1 
Screen cleaning 
64 
11.2 
Height of screen and need for stages 
66 
11.3 
Screen bars 
66 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 8 ===
viii  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
11.4 
Screen alignment 
68 
11.5 
Angle of screen 
69 
11.6 
Fabrication and materials, fixings and fastenings 
69 
11.7 
Working platforms 
70 
11.8 
Health and safety provisions 
70 
11.9 
Access to the screen 
72 
11.10 
Storage of debris 
73 
11.11 
Visual amenity issues 
73 
11.12 
Security arrangements 
73 
11.13 
Water-level monitoring 
74 
11.14 
CCTV 
75 
12 
Screen bypass 
76 
12.1 
Justification for the provision of a screen bypass 
76 
12.2 
Alternative bypass arrangements 
76 
12.3 
Hazards associated with bypasses 
77 
12.4 
Bank raising 
78 
12.5 
Overtopping flood flow route 
78 
13 
Other operation and maintenance issues 
79 
13.1 
Flood and coastal risk management systems 
79 
13.2 
Performance specification 
79 
13.3 
Operational plans 
80 
13.4 
Temporary storage of debris 
82 
13.5 
Removal/disposal of debris 
82 
13.6 
Watercourse maintenance 
82 
13.7 
Record of operation and maintenance 
83 
14 
Summary of trash and security screens – Key guidance 
84 
References 
89 
List of abbreviations 
90 
Glossary  
91 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 9 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
ix 
Index of tables and figures 
Table 4.1 Hazards associated with trash and security screens 
14 
Table 4.2 Risk factors for culvert blockage 
18 
Table 4.3 Scoring system for trash screens 
19 
Table 4.4 Guidelines for assessing risk and requirement for a trash screen 
20 
Table 4.5 Factors affecting the extent to which a culvert presents a hazard 
22 
Table 4.6 Examples of options to reduce safety risks associated with culverts 
23 
Table 4.7 Scoring system for security screens 
23 
Table 4.8 Assessment of the safety hazard presented by a culvert 
24 
Table 6.1 Categories of debris 
34 
Table 7.1 Main components of a screen 
39 
Table 7.2 Determining design debris amount 
43 
Table 7.3 Blinded depth factor 
43 
Table 10.1 Components of head loss 
52 
Table 10.2 Recommended design conditions for the hydraulic analysis of the 
 
culvert structure 
56 
Table 10.3 Culvert and trash screen modelling capability of hydraulic modelling 
software 
60 
 
Figure 3.1  Highway culvert with no requirements for a screen 
9 
Figure 3.2  Culvert in a residential area with no requirements for a screen 
10 
Figure 3.3  Flow chart to consider requirement for a new trash or security screen 
12 
Figure 4.1  Culvert inlet on private land 
14 
Figure 4.2  Poorly designed screen 
16 
Figure 4.3  Screen on a small culvert not securely fixed in place 
22 
Figure 4.4  Crude security screen at the downstream end of a small culvert 
25 
Figure 4.5  A security screen on the outlet of a culvert 
25 
Figure 4.6  Security screen at the entrance to a large flood relief culvert 
28 
Figure 4.7  Decision-support register for new screens 
29 
Figure 5.1  Decision-support register for existing screens 
32 
Figure 7.1  Section drawing of the components of a trash screen 
38 
Figure 7.2  Plan drawing of the components of a trash screen 
38 
Figure 7.3  Section of a trash screen showing effective screen areas 
40 
Figure 7.4  Amount of debris expected from different catchment types 
42 
Figure 7.5  Multi-stage screen at the outlet from a flood storage facility 
43 
Figure 8.1  Coarse screen at a flood relief culvert inlet showing degree of  
 
 debris build-up (the ‘Beaverscreen’ effect) 
46 
Figure 8.2 Design tolerances allowed children to squeeze between the concrete    
sidewall and the end bar on the screen 
47 
Figure 10.1 Contribution of a clean screen to the total head loss at a culvert 
53 
Figure 10.2 Impact of debris on partially blocked screen on total head loss 
54 
Figure 10.3 Flooding caused by total blockage of a screen 
54 
Figure 10.4 Flooding caused by partial blockage of a trash screen in a 
 
 narrow channel 
58 
Figure 10.5 Two-dimensional hydraulic model used to aid the design of 
 
 a screen on the River Sheaf (diagonal alignment to flow) 
61 
Figure 11.1  A recently installed screen in an urban setting 
63 
Figure 11.2  A debris screen on a small culvert 
67 
Figure 11.3  Trash screen in a public park 
68 
Figure 11.4  Screen on the River Sheaf with diagonal alignment to flow 
69 
Figure 12.1 Kydbrook screen and bypass facility, Ravensbourne, South London 
77 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 10 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
1 
PART ONE – INTRODUCTION 
AND OVERVIEW 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 11 ===
2  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
1 
Introduction 
Culverts are conduits that enclose flowing bodies of water, for example to enable a 
stream to pass under a road. Screens can be installed on the ends of culverts for two 
main reasons: 
• Trash screens reduce the amount of trash and debris entering the culvert 
(where it could cause a blockage). 
• Security screens prevent unauthorised access to the culvert. 
It is possible for a screen to serve both of these functions, although normally there will 
be one dominant purpose. 
A trash or security screen can also affect the hydraulic performance of a watercourse 
and impact upon flood risk. The Environment Agency Trash Screen Policy is based on 
a risk-based approach. The expectation is that new screens will be provided only 
where the need is justified and the benefits outweigh the risks.  
The aim of asset managers is to ensure that assets: 
• always perform as designed;  
• are fit for purpose;  
• provide value for money;  
• minimise both the flood and general health and safety risks. 
This Trash and Security Screen Guide (the guide) supports this aim by: 
• encouraging asset managers, planners and designers to consider carefully 
the need for a screen, and fully investigate alternative means of achieving 
the desired outcome; 
• providing comprehensive guidance on the planning and design of a screen 
(following confirmation of the decision that a screen is required);  
• providing guidance to owners and operators of screens on how they should 
be operated and maintained to ensure optimum performance.  
1.1 
Scope of the guide 
For clarity and emphasis the guide is split into three main parts relating to:  
• introduction and overview; 
• assessment of need for a trash or security screen including the assessment 
of existing screens and the risk of providing or not providing a new or 
replacement screen;  
• screen design, monitoring, and operational considerations. 
The guide does not cover ‘fine mesh’ weed screens and filters, which are commonly 
provided at pumping stations. 
The approach described in this guide is derived from studies into the performance of 
trash screens across the UK. Much of the guidance is based on empirical research 
comparing well-performing screens against those where problems have developed.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 12 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
3 
1.2 
Use of this guide 
This guide has three potential user groups: 
• anyone responsible for assessing the need for a new or existing screen; 
• designers of screens;  
• asset managers responsible for maintenance and operation of screens. 
The guide sets out how each step of the requirement/need for a screen and risk 
assessments, design and operational management should be addressed. Design tasks 
address the design of a completely new screen and the refurbishment or improvement 
of an existing one. 
The recommended risk-based approach uses a scoring system based on identifying 
hazards and assessing the probability of them occurring. A risk score is then used as a 
decision-support tool to determine whether or not to provide a screen.  
A flow chart is included at the end of Section 3 to assist asset managers and 
designers.  It illustrates the step-by-step approach to assess the need for a screen and 
the processes to be followed during its subsequent design. 
1.3 
Context 
This Trash and Security Screen Guide supersedes the Trash Screens: Design and 
Operations Manual (Environment Agency 2002) which itself replaced the National 
Rivers Authority (NRA) Publication P-126, Interim Guidance Notes for the Design and 
Operation of Trash Screens (NRA 1993). 
Other engineering and environmental design guides have been produced by the 
Environment Agency, CIRIA and HR Wallingford (see References section). These 
should be consulted at the time of design or assessment to ensure that best practice is 
being applied. The guide will form a companion guide to the CIRIA Culvert Design and 
Operations Guide which is scheduled to be published in 2009. 
1.4 
Role of the Environment Agency 
The Environment Agency has a number of roles relating to trash screens including:  
• regulatory authority, issuing land drainage consents for new works;  
• site owner;  
• operating authority, exercising permissive powers via a maintenance 
regime.  
Procedures need to be followed within these roles, and we must be able to show that 
best practice has been used in the design and assessment of screens.  
This is most readily demonstrated by an audit trail showing use of this guide. To ensure 
good practice all decisions made regarding the design and assessment of a screen 
should be recorded in a decision-support register.  Specific decision-support registers 
have been identified for both new and existing screens.  Further details are found in 
Sections 4.9 and 5.3 respectively.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 13 ===
4  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
1.5 
Key guidance 
Key guidance boxes such as the one below are included throughout the guide to 
highlight important points. They should not be regarded as complete summary of a 
particular section. 
Key guidance 1: Use of screens 
We discourage the use of any form of screen except in circumstances where the 
benefits are significant and outweigh the risks. 
1.6 
Definitions 
Definitions of technical terms are given in the Glossary. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 14 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
5 
2 
Classification of screen types 
Understanding the primary purpose of the screen is fundamental to making the correct 
decisions on the need, risks and detailed design for the screen. Throughout this guide 
screens are referred to as being either a trash screen or a security screen and this 
section provides more detail on this distinction.  
However, it is quite common for a screen to perform more than one function and, if so, 
it is necessary to consider different design criteria and specifications for each type of 
screen. If this approach introduces different and conflicting requirements, the final 
design needs to result from an evaluation and consideration of the risks associated 
with the particular installation. 
2.1 
Trash screens 
Key guidance 2: Objective of a trash screen 
The objective of a trash screen should not be to trap as much debris as possible. In 
fact, the screen should trap as little debris as possible commensurate with the aim of 
preventing material that could cause a blockage from progressing downstream. 
 
The type of trash screen required will depend upon the nature of the debris in the 
watercourse. The type of debris can be loosely classified into three types: 
• coarse debris (such as boulders and tree trunks); 
• general debris (anything from branches/plants to armchairs and oil drums);  
• a combination of coarse and general. 
Screens for finer material debris are not covered in this guide. 
The distinction between debris types and trash screen types is not clearly defined, and 
relates mainly to the spacing of the bars on the screen. However, coarse screens are 
often placed some distance upstream of the culvert and are designed to overtop when 
obscured by debris whereas general debris screens are usually situated at the inlet to 
the culvert. This guide addresses both types of trash screen, though those relating to 
general debris are covered in greater detail. 
2.2 
Coarse debris (including boulders) screens 
Coarse debris can be classified as: 
• bed load which rolls along the bed and should pass through any screen;  
• floating debris.  
Coarse debris may include large vegetation (such as tree trunks) and boulders.  
Depending on the nature of the watercourse, it may be possible to reduce coarse 
debris by routine inspections and physical removal. However, it is unlikely that all 
potential debris can be removed before it arrives at a trash screen site.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 15 ===
6  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
Coarse debris is likely to require stronger screen bars and the weight of the debris is 
likely to be greater than general debris. Screen bars are likely to be more widely 
spaced.  
Debris collecting on a coarse screen will be overtopped by the continuing flow and 
such screens need to be designed to ensure that overtopping does not cause flooding. 
2.3 
General debris screens 
In many urban locations, general debris may be present accidentally (such as wind-
blown debris) but more often arises through a deliberate act (for example, disposal of 
household waste such as old carpets, furniture, garden cuttings).  
Some debris may arise from vandalism (such as shopping trolleys, road signs). This 
type of debris varies in physical size and weight, and is often the most difficult to 
remove from a screen. 
Screen bar spacings have to be sufficiently small to enable the trapping of materials 
without being too small so as to be prone to unnecessary blockage. 
2.4 
Combination of debris screens 
There will be sites where a combination of debris is likely. In this situation, a 
combination of screen types may be appropriate, with a low-level coarse screen sited 
upstream of the main general debris screen.  
2.5 
Security screens 
Key guidance 3: Objective of a security screen 
The purpose of a security screen is to prevent unauthorised access to the pipe or 
culvert.  
 
Unauthorised access to a pipe or culvert or other enclosed space presents the greatest 
risk at sites where children may be playing or where a rapid rise in water levels is 
possible.  
If a culvert site cannot be fenced to prevent unauthorised access, there may be 
justification to install a security screen particularly if the risk of unauthorised entry is 
greater than the risk of blockage of a screen at the site. Security screens prevent 
unauthorised access to the pipe or culvert but a screen at the downstream end of the 
pipe will also prevent escape and this should be always taken into account.  
For a security screen to be effective it must by definition be similar to a general debris 
screen in its general characteristics but screen bar spacing becomes the main design 
criterion. 
This guide covers the justification and risk assessment processes in relation to types of 
screen in Section 4. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 16 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
7 
PART TWO – ASSESSING THE 
NEED FOR A SCREEN 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 17 ===
8  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
3 
Assessing need 
3.1 
Identify the options 
It should not be assumed that a screen is the right answer to a particular problem.  
There is no doubt that a properly designed screen can reduce or even eliminate the 
probability of debris blockage or of unauthorised access. It is also true that screens 
themselves can cause severe problems, most notably local flooding due to blockage of 
the screen. It is therefore essential that all practical alternatives are investigated and 
eliminated before reaching the decision to provide a screen. 
The need to explore other options is reinforced by the fact that, in all cases, it is 
necessary under the Water Resources Act 1991 and the Land Drainage Act 1991 to 
seek approval and where necessary a formal consent from the Environment Agency 
before installing a screen in a watercourse.  This requirement applies to all proposals 
both from within the Environment Agency and from external parties. 
Key guidance 4: Policy 
The guidance contained in this document is generally in accordance with the 
Environment Agency’s draft policy regarding screens. Nothing in this guidance 
supersedes or overrides the stated policy of the Environment Agency. 
 
Approval is unlikely to be given unless the promoter of the screen can demonstrate that 
all other options have been explored and rejected as impracticable. Any application for 
approval will therefore need to be supported by evidence that a credible investigation of 
alternatives has been carried out.  
Options fall into three broad categories namely: 
• do nothing; 
• reduce the debris or access problem at source;  
• design, install and maintain a screen. 
The identification of options applies equally to trash screens and security screens 
because, although the primary function of the latter is to prevent unauthorised access, 
any screen will accumulate debris over time.  
Key guidance 5: Options 
It should not be assumed that a screen is the right answer to a particular problem. 
In any given situation, a screen is only one of the options available to remove or 
reduce the perceived risk. A decision to provide a screen at any location must be 
based on a full appreciation of the risks and benefits. It is essential that all practical 
alternatives are investigated and eliminated before reaching the decision to provide a 
screen. 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 18 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
9 
3.2 
Do nothing 
In all cases, the ‘do nothing’ option (no active intervention) means just that – no action 
is taken to lower or remove the perceived risk. This option is only acceptable if the 
perceived risk is shown to be small or non-existent, or if the risks associated with taking 
any form of action outweigh those of taking no action. Nevertheless, the ‘do nothing’ 
option provides a baseline against which other options are compared. 
 
 
Figure 3.1  Highway culvert with no requirements for a screen.  
Figure 3.1 shows a relatively short and straight large cross-section culvert under a rural 
highway; the probability of debris causing a blockage is small, the flood risk is small 
and there is no justification for a trash screen. 
The culvert can flow full or close to full as it is in the picture.  It is relatively short so the 
risk of any person becoming trapped within the culvert is small and the site is fenced. 
There is no justification for a security screen. 
 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 19 ===
10  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
 
Figure 3.2  Culvert in a residential area with no requirements for a screen. 
Figure 3.2 shows a culvert with similar characteristics to the highway culvert shown in 
Figure 3.1.  The risk assessment at this site identified no requirements for a screen 
both for trash and security. 
3.3 
Reduce problem at source 
The next group of options focuses on removing or reducing the risk by actions that 
address the problem at source rather than its consequences, for example by looking at 
ways to reduce the debris load in a stream or keeping children away from the entrance 
to a culvert.  
These options can include such measures as discouraging illegal dumping in or near a 
watercourse and fencing off an unsafe inlet rather than installing a security screen. 
Although it will only be applicable in certain circumstances, removing the culvert (day 
lighting) and reinstating the open watercourse should always be considered. 
3.4 
Install a screen 
The remaining options involve the construction of works, including screens, to reduce 
or remove the risk. The consideration of options should not focus only on the particular 
structure in question, but should examine the ‘hydraulic system’ and the process of 
debris movement. This is particularly important when there are significant flood risks.  
Assessment of options must be consistent with System Asset Management Plans 
(SAMPs). 
All options should be given due consideration, although it will often be possible to 
dismiss some without detailed investigation because they are unacceptable. This 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 20 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
11 
process should be documented to trace the decision-making process. As far as is 
reasonably practicable, all interested parties should be involved in this process or at 
least kept informed.  
Decision-making may be aided by benefit-cost analysis though, in the case of a 
security screen, it is often difficult to put monetary values on the risks avoided. 
However, this approach does ensure that operation and maintenance costs are 
properly considered. 
Key guidance 6: Justification 
The decision to install a screen must be fully justified.  
 
Justification may take the form of a benefit-cost assessment in which all the costs and 
benefits are evaluated over the whole life of the screen. In the case of a security 
screen, the emphasis may shift away from a simple economic analysis but, even so, 
the justification must be clear and the economics must be investigated so that both the 
initial investment and the long-term costs are understood and accepted. 
An alternative is the multi-criteria approach in which interested parties are able to agree 
the criteria and then score them. The main advantages of this approach are that it is 
transparent and all interested parties have an opportunity to contribute. However, it can 
often be difficult to agree the weighting given to individual criteria. 
The flow chart in Figure 3.3 is intended to assist asset managers and designers.  It 
illustrates: the step-by-step approach required to assess the need for a screen; the 
stages at which various levels of justification are required; and the processes to be 
completed in the subsequent design.  
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 21 ===
12  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
1.
Initial Risk Assessment 
Is there still a need for
a screen?
Investigate other 
options including 
reducing 
problem at 
source
2.
What is the purpose of the screen?
General1
Coarse2
Combination3
Security4
3.
- What is the potential debris load?
- Calculate area of screen required
- What are the environmental opportunities
   or constraints at the site?
4.
Can screen area be 
fitted into available 
space?
4a.
Review location 
of screen
4b.
Is relocation
possible?
6.
- Who is screen owner and is concept accepted 
   by them?
- Who is responsible for operation and 
   maintenance and is this accepted?
- What specific H & S requirements are there?
5.
Select optimum bar 
spacing by confirming 
purpose of the screen
Review need for 
screen
Investigate other 
options
7.
What is the hydraulic impact on upstream water 
levels of:
a)   Free flowing channel?
b)   Partially blocked screen?
c)   Fully blocked screen?
8.
Has the risk of flood damage 
by a blocked screen been 
mitigated?
9.
Continue design 
of screen 
including 
detailed 
specifications
8c.
Is screen reconfiguration 
possible?
8b.
Has the risk been 
mitigated?
What is the hydraulic 
impact?
8a.
Investigate mitigation 
measures including flood 
bypass channel and/or bank 
raising and/or flood flow 
routing
10.
What 
environmental 
enhancements 
have been 
included?
Review need for 
screen
Investigate other 
options
12.
On completion of final design configuration, review and check the 
following:
What is hydraulic impact?
Have those responsible for operation and maintenance 
accepted the design?
Has an agreed Operational Plan been produced?
What environmental opportunities and constraints are there at 
the site and what enhancements have been included?
What are the specific Health & Safety implications and how 
have these been addressed?
11.
Complete design of 
screen including 
operations and 
maintenance 
specifications
What are the construction 
impacts?
Complete Design of Trash 
Screen
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
START
Do not provide screen
Investigate other options
What is the Performance 
Specification for this Asset 
System?
1 General – Preventing debris (e.g. food packaging & containers, small branches, leaves, twigs) from passing into a culvert where it could accumulate and obstruct the flow
2 Coarse – Preventing large items of debris (e.g. oil drums, pallets, sofas) from passing downstream where they could become lodged in a culvert and thereby cause a blockage
3 Combination – A mixture of two or more of the other screen purposes
4 Security – Preventing people (principally children) from entering a culvert 
 
Figure 3.3  Flow chart to consider requirement for a new trash or security 
screen.  
 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 22 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
13 
4 
Risk assessment and 
management 
Key guidance 7: Risk assessment  
Assessment of all the risks taking into account probability and consequence is an 
essential part of the appraisal process. This process must include the risks 
associated with installing a screen, as well as assessment of the perceived risks that 
led to the investigation into the need for a screen. 
4.1 
Introduction to risk 
To understand the term ‘risk’ better, it is necessary to define the term ‘hazard’. A 
hazard is some event, phenomenon or human activity with the potential to cause harm. 
Risk is best understood when considered in terms of its two component parts: 
• probability that the hazard will occur;  
• consequence of it occurring.  
For example, the consequence of being run over by a bus (the hazard) is severe, but 
the probability of it happening is very low – especially if normal precautions are taken. 
Overall, therefore, the risk is low. Similarly, the consequences of being swept into a 
long culvert flowing full would be severe, resulting in death by drowning. However, if 
the probability of it happening is very low, then the risk may be acceptable. 
In assessing risk it is important to take a broader view rather than looking at a site in 
isolation. In taking this wider perspective it is essential to assess the nature of the 
problem as well as examining the potential impacts of providing a screen. 
4.2 
General hazards associated with screens 
Key guidance 8: Flooding risk 
All screens, regardless of their primary purpose, will collect debris. This will obstruct 
flow, causing the upstream water level to rise, and will increase the probability of 
flooding. This is a key factor where the flooding would lead to significant damage to 
property and/or infrastructure. 
 
The greatest hazard associated with the provision of a screen is that it becomes 
blocked, restricting flow and causing water levels upstream to rise and flood the local 
area. However, this is not the only hazard and Table 4.1 lists the main hazards. 
 
 
 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 23 ===
14  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
 
Table 4.1 Hazards associated with trash and security screens. 
Hazards associated with not 
providing a screen 
Hazards that may arise as a consequence of 
installing a screen in a watercourse 
Death or injury as a result of someone 
entering a culvert or being swept in 
during a flood 
Flooding caused by debris accumulating on a screen 
and blocking it 
Flooding resulting from blockage of the 
culvert by debris 
Injury to those responsible for maintaining and cleaning 
the screen 
Damage to the interior of a culvert or 
services it contains (uncommon) 
Environmental degradation – visual impact, restrictions 
to wildlife movement, lighting nuisance, health impacts 
of accumulating trash at the site, vandalism 
 
Structural failure 
 
Restriction on access in an emergency 
 
 
Figure 4.1  Culvert inlet on private land.  
The culvert in Figure 4.1 is steep (about one in 30) and the outfall would present 
hazardous conditions for anyone swept into the culvert. The forested area upstream 
also generates a lot of woody debris.  However, the culvert entrance is on private land 
and it has been determined that it is not necessary to provide a security screen.  
There is no history of blockage of the culvert by trash or debris.  This is probably due to 
the steeply sloping 1.3 metre diameter smooth concrete pipe culvert which generates a 
rapid flow velocity and is capable of conveying the debris load. There are residual risks 
of blockage or accident, but the provision of a screen carries a greater risk as it would 
inevitably block quickly in a flood and would lead to flooding of adjacent property. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 24 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
15 
4.3 
Consultation and stakeholder engagement 
It is vital that the designers of the screen identify and consult those who will be 
responsible for maintaining and cleaning it. Consultation with local residents is also 
essential if the true risks are to be identified and assessed. The consultation process 
will encourage sensible discussion on, for example, the real risks of not providing a 
security screen and possible alternatives. 
Key guidance 9: Operational risks 
 
It is a fundamental part of the planning and design process that the maintenance 
requirements are fully assessed and accepted by the owner or operator of the 
screen. In particular this relates to: 
• regular cleaning of the screen and safe disposal of accumulated debris;  
• emergency response in the event that the screen becomes blocked with 
debris during a flood event. 
Failure to address these issues has, in the past, led to serious flooding and 
subsequent legal action.  
Even when all possible steps are taken to ensure that the course of action adopted is 
based on sound reasoning and good data, and with the consent of all interested 
parties, it is essential that responsibility is defined, accepted and recorded in an 
operational plan.  
4.4 
Risk issues – Trash screens 
4.4.1 
Blockage of a screen 
A major hazard with serious consequences is that of flooding to property caused by 
partial or full blockage of a screen or, in the event that a screen is not provided, 
blockage of the culvert. 
Complete blockage of a culvert will result in the flow finding another route. This might 
cause minimal nuisance with, for example, water flowing at shallow depth across a 
road. Alternatively, such a blockage can cause extensive and damaging flooding which 
can be particularly hazardous in an urban area. An inappropriately designed screen 
can have the same impact, but the blockage can happen much more quickly and may 
occur much more frequently. 
It is difficult to predict how quickly a screen will become blocked or the degree of 
blockage that will occur. Experience indicates that in some cases blockage and 
resulting flooding can happen very quickly.  
The factors that affect the degree of build-up of trash are covered in Section 6. 
Partial blockage of a screen has an impact equivalent to constructing a weir or 
otherwise constricting the stream. Water will have to flow over it and the upstream 
water level will be increased by the obstruction.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 25 ===
16  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
It is relatively straightforward to assess the impact of partial obstruction on upstream 
water levels; it is more difficult to decide on a credible degree of blockage. Varying 
degrees of blockage should be modelled and the impacts of subsequent flooding 
identified. 
In most cases, the main hazard associated with trash or debris entering a culvert is that 
it will accumulate and cause a blockage in a place where it is difficult to remove. In 
addition, there are occasionally situations when large items of debris could damage the 
culvert interior or the services therein. Such situations are rare and can normally be 
overcome by alternative measures such as protecting the vulnerable areas or 
relocating the services. 
Trash and debris blocking a culvert is relatively rare, much less common than the same 
material blocking a screen. By definition, the spacing between the bars of a screen is 
much smaller than the width of the culvert. This means the accumulation of trash and 
debris on a screen is much more likely (and much more rapid) than any such 
accumulation within the culvert. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.2  Poorly designed screen.  
The image in Figure 4.2 illustrates a screen which is effective at keeping debris out of 
the culvert and preventing unauthorised access; however, it is not well designed, 
demonstrating the impact that poor design can have for blockage of a screen. The 
provision of horizontal bars greatly increases the rate of build up of trash, preventing 
even very small items from passing harmlessly into the culvert.  These bars also make 
raking the screen to remove debris very difficult and the steep angle to the horizontal 
compounds this problem.  
Design of the inlet structure itself is not ideal. The flared wing walls complicate the 
screen shape and they are too short to accommodate an effective transition from the 
earth channel to the culvert. There are no facilities to enable cleaning activities to be 
undertaken safely. 
 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 26 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
17 
Key guidance 10: Risk of blockage (trash screens) 
Before deciding that a trash screen is necessary, it is essential to assess the 
probability of blockage of the culvert. This is a two-part process involving: 
• consideration of the nature of the debris load and its source;  
• likelihood of this material accumulating in the culvert. 
4.4.2 
Nature of the debris load 
Assessment of the debris load is described in detail in Section 6. Part of the design 
process involves identifying the source of the material in the watercourse. Sometimes 
there is a readily identifiable localised source of the debris likely to cause a problem. 
Such debris often consists of large items that are more likely to lodge within a culvert. 
Example sources include: 
• fly-tipping sites (hotspots of illegally dumped rubbish); 
• trees and other plants in or adjacent to the banks of the watercourse; 
• industrial and/or commercial areas where, for example, scrap timber is 
dumped on the banks of the watercourse; 
• farms (straw bales, fertiliser sacks);  
• residential properties whose owners treat the stream at the bottom of their 
garden as a convenient site for the disposal of garden and other waste. 
In each case, there are options for addressing the problem at source, greatly reducing 
the probability that debris will enter the watercourse (see Section 6.4). In all such 
cases, we are likely to support any actions taken to reduce the incidence and/or extent 
of the problem. Solutions include: 
• local awareness campaigns; 
• fencing industrial sites where materials are stored on the stream bank;  
• greater policing of fly-tipping hotspots. 
Small items of debris – which includes most natural debris as well as litter – will be 
conveyed through the culvert in the same way that they are carried in the stream. In 
contrast, this same material can accumulate rapidly on a screen, restricting the flow 
and resulting in the blockage that provision of the screen sought to avoid. 
4.4.3 
Likelihood of material accumulating in the culvert 
The second stage of examining the probability of a culvert becoming blocked involves 
an assessment of the culvert itself.  
In the case of a culvert that has not yet been built, it is usually possible to reduce the 
likelihood of blockage by designing to avoid the risk factors outlined in Table 4.2. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 27 ===
18  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
Table 4.2 Risk factors for culvert blockage. 
Factor 
Issues 
Size  
The smaller the culvert, the more likely it is to become blocked. The 
preferred option is to avoid multiple barrel culverts and adopt the 
largest size practicable. 
Bends, steps and 
changes of cross-section  
These should be avoided as they can trap larger items of debris, 
which start to cause a blockage. 
Length  
The longer the culvert, the greater the probability that debris will be 
trapped somewhere, and the more difficult it is to remove a blockage
Hydraulic design 
A culvert that flows with a free water surface, even in large floods, is 
less likely to trap large debris than one which flows full. 
Inverted siphon culverts 
(those where the barrel 
dips down to pass under 
an obstruction) 
These are more likely to block due to the accumulation of debris 
during periods of low flows. Such culverts should be avoided except 
in circumstances where there is no other practicable option. 
 
In the case of an existing culvert, removing the hazardous elements may be difficult. 
Nevertheless, possible solutions should be examined. These include: 
• eliminating the hazard by ‘day lighting’ the culvert (removing it and 
reinstating an open channel) where it is practical and reasonable to do so; 
• providing a manhole/access chamber at a problem point to make access 
easier (this may introduce other hazards associated with working in 
confined spaces); 
• trapping larger debris upstream of the culvert entrance using a coarse 
screen that can overtop;  
• providing remote water-level monitoring at a site where a trash screen is 
not justified in order to identify increased water levels in the culvert/inverted 
siphon, indicating possible blockage. 
4.4.4 
Assessing the risk of blockage of a culvert or damage to 
the interior of a culvert 
It is often difficult to assess the real risk associated with debris in a culvert, but the 
following guidance will help to assess the degree of risk based on known parameters. 
Use the scoring system shown in Table 4.3 to analyse the risk and requirement for a 
trash screen at a site. The risk score is the product of the probability and consequence 
for each of the risk categories. Assessment of the score for each risk area provides the 
basis of the decision to install a screen or not.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 28 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
19 
Table 4.3 Scoring system for trash screens. 
Score 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
Probability 
High 
 
 
 
Low 
Consequence 
Very 
Significant 
 
 
 
Insignificant 
 
This scoring system should be used to examine the main risk areas, namely: 
• blockage of culvert;  
• damage caused by debris to infrastructure of culvert. 
Table 4.4 provides guidance on assessing scores based on historical and factual site 
data. 
For each of the two risk factors (blockage and damage), there is a possible maximum 
score of 25. For example, a probability score of five multiplied by a consequence 
score of five gives a total score of 25, and a probability score of three multiplied by a 
consequence score of four provides a total score of 12. 
The decision rules below should be applied to the higher of the blockage and damage 
scores. 
Key guidance 11: Decision rules (blockage and damage) 
For either of the risk factors (blockage or damage) a score of 15 and above indicates 
that a screen is required. 
Those scoring between seven and 14 should be investigated further and, where 
there is uncertainty in the significance of the consequence score, the Area Flood 
Risk Manager should be consulted.   
For scores of six and below, it is unlikely that a screen is required. 
Further clarification on the inclusion of remote water-level monitoring and CCTV 
monitoring is set out in Section 4.7. 
 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 29 ===
 
20  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
Table 4.4 Guidelines for assessing risk and requirement for a trash screen. 
Blockage of culvert  
Score 
 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
More frequently than     
one in two years 
One in two to one in five 
years 
One in five to one in 10 
years 
One in 10 to one in 25 
years 
Less frequently than 
one in 25 years 
Probability 
Regular recorded 
blockage (e.g. once or 
twice in the last two 
years). 
Some record of blockage 
(e.g. once or twice in the 
last five years) or 
Culvert size under one m2, 
catchment urban or 
woodland. 
Culvert size under one m2 
and at least 50 per cent 
urban or woodland or 
Culvert size over one m2 
and under three m2 with 
potential blockage points. 
Culvert size over one m2 
and under three m2 or 
Culvert size over three 
m2 with no upstream 
public access. 
Culvert size over  
three m2  
Over £1 million 
£100,000 to £1 million 
£10,000 to £100,000 
£1,000 to £10,000 
Under £1,000 
Consequence 
Cost of flooding damages 
plus 
Cost of removing 
blockage and culvert 
repair (per event). 
Cost of flooding damages 
plus 
Cost of removing blockage 
and culvert repair (per 
event). 
Cost of flooding damages 
plus 
Cost of removing blockage 
and culvert repair (per 
event). 
Cost of flooding 
damages plus 
Cost of removing 
blockage and culvert 
repair (per event). 
Cost of flooding 
damages plus 
Cost of removing 
blockage and culvert 
repair (per event). 
Damage caused by debris to infrastructure of culvert  
Score 
 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
More frequently than 
one in two years 
One in two to one in five 
years 
One in five to one in 10 
years 
One in 10 to one in 25 
years 
Less frequently than 
one in 25 years 
Probability 
Impact damage to 
structure from debris in 
flow (e.g. once or twice in 
the last two years). 
Impact damage at 
frequency of once or twice 
in the last five years. 
Some impact damage 
possible due to size of 
debris. 
Low but some possibility 
of impact damage. 
Rare likelihood of 
damage or no impact 
damage possible. 
Over £1 million 
£100,000 to £1 million 
£10,000 to £100,000 
£1,000 to £10,000 
Under £1,000 
Consequence 
Repairs involving 
diversion of watercourse 
and works to full length of 
culvert. 
Repairs involving significant 
temporary works and works 
to more than half of culvert 
length. 
Repairs involving some 
temporary works and 
repairs to less than half of 
culvert length. 
Repairs requiring no 
temporary works. 
Minor repairs required, 
not in urgent need of 
attention. May be 
encompassed in 
general maintenance. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 30 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
21 
4.5 
Risk Issues – Security Screens 
Key guidance 12: Risk of blockage (security screens) 
If a screen is proposed for security reasons it also needs to be assessed for the flood 
risk associated with its potential blockage following the methods set out in this guide. 
 
The issues associated with blockage of a screen discussed in Section 4.4.1 are equally 
applicable to security screens and should be considered along with the following 
additional risks when assessing the risks associated with security screens. 
4.5.1 
Identifying the risk 
The open mouth of a culvert or, in particular, an inverted siphon is often thought to 
present a significant hazard. Most often this is associated with the perception that 
adventurous or inquisitive children will enter the culvert and thus be exposed to injury 
or death by drowning. Sometimes the perception is that someone may fall into the 
watercourse in a flood and be swept into the culvert and be drowned. 
In fact, the probability of death by drowning in the UK is small: the Royal Society for the 
Prevention of Accidents (RoSPA) estimates the risk to be 0.8 per 100,000 population.  
In 2003, there were a total of 381 deaths by drowning of which 144 occurred in rivers 
and streams (http://www.nationalwatersafety.org.uk/inlandwatersafety/facts.htm).  
Many of the latter were associated with alcohol and bravado, and most were in large 
rivers. While any premature death is tragic, it is clear that the probability of drowning by 
being swept into a culvert or inverted siphon is relatively small. 
There are also health risks associated with playing in streams, most notably 
leptospirosis (Weil’s disease). As this is associated with rat urine, and it is possible that 
the hazard is greater inside a culvert than it is along the banks of a watercourse.  
In the face of real concerns expressed by local residents, recourse to statistics and 
reassurances can be insufficient to convince people that a screen is likely to cause 
more problems than it solves. It is therefore recommended that local residents are 
consulted and involved in the process of exploring other options. 
4.5.2 
Quantifying and reducing risk 
The first part of the process is to attempt to quantify the risk to life and limb, taking into 
account the probability and the consequence. In order to present a hazard, a culvert 
clearly has to be large enough to be accessible by a child. In reality, this covers the 
vast majority of existing culverts.  
A number of factors affect the degree to which a particular culvert presents a hazard to 
anyone entering it (see Table 4.5).  If it can be demonstrated that the factors listed in 
Table 4.5 indicate a low level of risk, it should be possible to argue that there is no 
need for a security screen.  
 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 31 ===
 
22  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
Table 4.5 Factors affecting the extent to which a culvert presents a hazard. 
Factor 
Issues 
Length  
A short culvert in which the outlet can be seen from the inlet is 
unlikely to be more hazardous than an open channel. A long culvert 
with bends and changes of cross-section presents a more significant 
hazard. 
Flow velocity/slope  
The higher the flow velocity the greater the hazard. A culvert 
(including the inlet transition) in which the flow velocity is locally high 
is more hazardous than one with similar velocities to the watercourse 
upstream. A steep culvert is more hazardous than one with a flat 
gradient. 
Full flow  
A culvert flowing partially full (with a free water surface) is unlikely to 
be significantly more hazardous than an open channel. A culvert that 
has a tendency to flow full in floods is potentially more hazardous. An 
inverted siphon, in which the central part is always full of water, is 
most definitely a hazard. 
Location and 
accessibility 
A culvert entrance that is near a residential area, yet which cannot 
readily be seen by passersby, is likely to attract children. 
Although adventurous children are not put off by difficult access, the 
probability that a child will be exposed to the hazard is likely to be 
greater if access to the culvert entrance is easy. 
Rate of rise of flood  
A flashy stream, in which the water level can rise rapidly, will present 
a greater hazard than one that takes time to rise. 
 
If there is evidence of a significant hazard, it is appropriate to explore a range of 
measures to reduce the risk by reducing the probability that harm will occur and/or by 
making the situation less hazardous. The ideal solution is to remove the hazard 
completely, but this is often not practical. 
 
Figure 4.3  Screen on a small culvert not securely fixed in place.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 32 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
23 
In Figure 4.3 a screen was provided at the entrance to a small but very long culvert 
which passes under a developed site. The intention of the screen was to prevent 
blockage of the culvert by debris such as oil drums and planks.  This objective was not 
initially achieved because the screen was not securely fixed to the culvert headwall. 
The risk of vandalism should be assessed at all screen sites.  
In the case of a proposed culvert (one which is in the process of being planned and 
designed), the aim should be to design it so that the hazards are eliminated as far as 
possible. For existing culverts, there are a number of options to reduce risk (Table 4.6).  
Table 4.6 Examples of options to reduce safety risks associated with culverts. 
Option 
Comments 
Fencing the 
culvert 
entrance  
Complete exclusion is difficult to achieve because the fencing cannot extend 
across the watercourse. Nevertheless it is possible to strongly discourage 
access. Consider deepening the bed immediately upstream of the culvert 
mouth and/or constructing a low weir at the culvert entrance to create an area 
of deeper water (even at low flows) which deters access. However, the deeper 
water may present a hazard, so this option needs careful consideration. 
Community 
engagement  
Involving the local community, especially through schools, can be very effective 
in discouraging children from playing in a dangerous area. However, action 
needs to be comprehensive and ongoing to remain effective. 
CCTV  
Cameras can be used as part of a programme of policing hazardous areas. 
Regular monitoring and rapid response are necessary for this option to be 
effective. 
Warning signs  These have limited impact in isolation but may work better when combined with 
any of the options above. 
Telemetry  
Used to remotely detect rapidly rising water levels and relay intruder alarms or 
other security systems. 
 
Where there is a real and significant risk that cannot be reduced to an acceptable level 
by any of the means outlined in Table 4.6, a security screen may be the only answer. 
4.5.3 
Assessing the safety hazard 
In situations where there is considered to be a safety hazard, there is no shortcut to 
carrying out a full risk assessment. However, Table 4.7 and 4.8 can be used as an 
initial guide, helping the designers to determine the likely degree of risk by first 
assessing the significance of the hazard. 
The scoring system for safety screens differs from that for trash screens in that the total 
score is derived by addition rather than multiplication of the individual scores. 
Table 4.7 Scoring system for security screens. 
Score 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
Hazard 
High 
 
 
 
Low 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 33 ===
 
24  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
Using Table 4.8, a score of one (low) to five (high) should be assessed for each of the 
five factors and then a total score achieved by adding together each of the five scores. 
This will give a maximum score of 25 (significant hazard) and a minimum of five (not 
significantly hazardous).  
Table 4.8 Assessment of the safety hazard presented by a culvert. 
Factor/Score 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
Length of 
culvert 
Over 100 m 
51-100 m 
21-50 m 
11-20 m 
Under 10 m 
Slope of 
culvert 
Over 1 in 50 
1 in 50 to    
1 in 100 
1 in 100 to    
1 in 250 
1 in 250 to     
1 in 1,000 
Under 1 in 
1,000 
Full flow? 
Always full 
(inverted 
siphon) 
Often flows 
full 
Sometimes 
flows full 
Rarely flows 
full 
Never flows 
full 
Location and 
accessibility 
In an area 
where 
children 
congregate 
Close to an 
area where 
children 
play 
Close to a 
residential 
area 
Not close to 
residences or 
relatively 
inaccessible 
Remote or 
inaccessible 
Rate of rise of 
flood 
Less than 
one hour 
Several 
hours 
Within 12 
hours 
12-24 hours 
Number of 
days 
TOTAL 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
 
In the further assessment of these sites, other factors that have not been scored should 
also be considered. These factors include: 
• hazards within the culvert; 
• nature of the culvert outfall; 
• reduction in culvert size along its length;  
• straightness of the culvert. 
Key guidance 13:  Decision rules (safety) 
Any hazard risk score above 20 out of maximum 25 will require the provision of a 
security screen. 
Further detailed consideration should be given to potential need for a security screen 
at those sites that score 15 or more. 
 
Figure 4.4 shows a crude security screen at the downstream end of a small culvert. 
Note that the screen is almost totally blocked with small debris from the inside. This 
debris must have entered the culvert by passing through the inlet, which may also have 
a screen. 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 34 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
25 
 
Figure 4.4  Crude security screen at the downstream end of a small culvert.  
 
Figure 4.5  A security screen on the outlet of a culvert. 
Figure 4.5 shows another security screen on the outlet of a culvert with a lockable gate 
to allow access for maintenance.  A trash screen is fitted to the inlet to the culvert. 
Debris passing through the inlet screen can accumulate on the inside of the outlet 
screen, which is difficult to clean. Regular inspection and cleaning may be necessary to 
ensure that there is no build-up of trash at the outlet.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 35 ===
 
26  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
Both of the above examples highlight issues associated with providing a screen at the 
outlet to a culvert which must be balanced with the security risks associated with not 
including the screen. 
Key guidance 14: Screens on the culvert outlet 
No screen should be provided at the outlet of a culvert unless there is a security 
screen at the inlet, as this could lead to the accidental death of anyone entering the 
culvert.  
A screen only at the outlet would also collect debris that would be difficult to remove.  
Where this situation can not be avoided, a hinged screen must be considered and 
secured by ’fail-safe’ fixings to enable emergency opening of the screen. 
4.6 
Environmental risks 
Although the environmental impacts of installing a screen are likely to be relatively 
small, there should always be an assessment of the potential impacts.  
It has been suggested that screens can obstruct the passage of some wildlife, but this 
is considered unlikely with the bar spacing recommended in this guide.  
If there is any uncertainty in the suitability of the screen design, specialist 
environmental staff should be consulted. In the case of a security screen, however, the 
safety of children must take precedence.  
Environmental risks and opportunities are addressed in more detail in Section 9. 
4.7 
Use of water level monitoring and CCTV to 
reduce risk 
Where there is a risk of flooding to houses or other property as a result of screen 
blockage, the use of remote water-level monitoring using telemetry and closed circuit 
television (CCTV) to give early indication of a developing problem must be considered. 
The recommended method for detecting screen blockages is to position water level 
monitors upstream and downstream of a screen with the data transmitted – normally by 
telemetry – to an operational centre. Under normal conditions (when a screen is 
relatively free flowing with little debris build-up), the difference in the two water levels 
will be small. When the screen is blocked, there will be a greater difference in level 
between the upstream and downstream sensors; if the blockage remains, this 
difference will increase as the flow increases. Alarms can be triggered by the 
increasing difference between the two water levels. Alarms can also be triggered by 
high upstream water levels alone. Design issues related to remote monitoring are 
discussed further in Section 11.13. 
The option of CCTV allows monitoring staff to observe conditions at the screen, 
enabling them to see actual site conditions and to detect early build-up of debris. They 
are thus able to organise a suitable response.  
CCTV is also useful if there are problems with vandalism at the site – both as a 
deterrent and as a means of early warning. Design issues related to CCTV are 
discussed further in Section 11.14. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 36 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
27 
If the Design Risk Assessment deems water-level monitoring and CCTV essential to 
the screen design, then they are not optional parts of the design which could be 
removed in the event of budgetary constraints. 
Key guidance 15: Need for monitoring 
Owners and operators of existing screens and designers of new screens must 
consider the use of remote water-level monitoring and CCTV as an aid to: 
• understanding the way in which the screen performs;  
• determining the operational response at times of high flows when the risk 
of blockage is at its greatest. 
 
Key guidance 16: Decision rules (monitoring) 
Any proposed screen site with a consequence score of five, for either blockage or 
damage (see Table 4.4), must have remote water-level monitoring installed, linked 
by telemetry to an operational centre and should have CCTV as an integral part of 
the scheme. 
Any proposed screen site with a consequence score of four, for either blockage or 
damage (see Table 4.4), must have remote water-level monitoring installed, linked 
by telemetry to an operational centre as an integral part of the scheme. In this 
scenario the installation of CCTV should be considered.  
At all other sites, remote water-level monitoring must be considered as part of the 
Design Risk Assessment. It can only be omitted where the risk can be acceptably 
mitigated or the consequence is negligible. 
 
Figure 4.6 shows a security screen at the entrance to a large relief culvert. Note that 
this photograph is for illustrative purposes only and may not represent best practice for 
all situations. 
The security screen shown includes the following features: 
• removable chains to allow access for cleaning the screen (however, these 
are particularly susceptible to theft and vandalism); 
• steps giving access to the screen for maintenance operations; 
• a lockable access door in the lower screen (bottom right of the photograph) 
to enable access inside the culvert for maintenance operatives; 
• two-stage screen to facilitate safe cleaning and to reduce the likelihood of 
complete blockage; 
• warning sign to raise awareness of hazard;  
• site fencing to deter access.  
 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 37 ===
 
28  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
Figure 4.6  Security screen at the entrance to a large flood relief culvert.  
4.8 
Other operational risks 
The proper management of screens is an essential element in the management of risks 
associated with their design and installation.  
Risks associated with the maintenance and operation of screens are considered in 
Section 13 of this guide. 
4.9 
Decision support – new screens 
It is important to show that best practice has been applied in the design and 
assessment of trash screens.  
Application of these principles is most readily demonstrated by an audit trail showing 
use of this guide. To ensure good practice, all decisions made regarding the design 
and assessment of a screen should be recorded. This demonstrates to the operators of 
a screen that the designer has identified the risks associated with a site and where 
appropriate, mitigated against them.  
A decision-support register for new screens is included (see Figure 4.7) and it is 
recommended that all decisions and justifications are set out within this, or a similar, 
register to ensure a suitable audit trail. 
 
 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 38 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
29 
 
Figure 4.7  Decision-support register for new screens.
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 39 ===
 
30  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
5 
Assessment of existing 
screens 
5.1 
Reason for an assessment 
Formal assessment of assets is a fundamental part of good asset management. 
Routine assessment of assets happens informally during every event when the 
structure performs its function up to the original design standard.  
Formal assessments are required to determine whether: 
• performance of the asset will meet the current policy or operational 
requirements or performance specification; 
• the original design standards are still relevant;  
• the asset is operating at an optimum performance level.  
As assets, all trash screens should be subject to formal assessment by their operating 
authority. The assessment may be prompted by: 
• changes to the characteristics of the watercourse and associated debris; 
• changes to the flood discharge under which the asset must perform 
satisfactorily; 
• changes to the asset management regime applied by the operating 
authority; 
• recognition that the trash screen has reached the end of its design life;  
• ‘failure’ of the trash screen. 
5.2 
Criteria to be assessed 
For many trash screen sites, there is little historical data on the original design, 
operation and maintenance. Furthermore, there is rarely any record of inspection and 
cleaning of the screen – information which is of great value to its future requirements.  
An asset manager should aim to generate and collate this type of data for future 
assessment and to provide the basis for justifying change. The data can be used to: 
• refine the whole life cost of the asset;  
• assess the environmental impact of the structure and its operational 
regime.  
Before the assessment of any assets, the availability of data should be considered to 
identify where gaps exist. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 40 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
31 
Assessment of the original design should include: 
• identification of the current site owner;  
• review of all criteria shown in this guide for the design of new screens.  
Assessment of the maintenance regime should include: 
• review of the number of routine and non-routine maintenance visits; 
• frequency of these visits;  
• amount of debris removed on each occasion. 
Assessment of the operational plan should include a review of the performance 
specification to ensure: 
• it is relevant for the current situation at the site;  
• all legislative requirements, including health and safety, are met.  
All operating authorities should ensure that legislative requirements are fully met.  
Assessment of an existing screen may reveal that the characteristics of the screen and 
watercourse are unchanged from the original design criteria. However it may be that, 
for example, the land use has changed or that the benefits of preventing flooding no 
longer exist. In such situations, the maintenance regime may need to be reconsidered 
and a new operational plan produced. 
If an assessment finds that any elements of a screen are not performing to the required 
standards, modifications should be made according to the guidance in Section 11. 
Key guidance 17: Assessment of existing screens 
Existing screen sites should be subject to the same level of review as for the 
justification of the requirement for a new screen at a site. 
Existing screens should also be reviewed with the same vigour as new screens when 
considering the requirement for asset maintenance and ongoing operational 
requirements. 
5.3 
Decision support – existing screens 
It is important to show that best practice has been applied in the assessment of all 
existing assets where a screen is present.  
Application of these principles is most readily demonstrated by an audit trail showing 
use of this guide. To ensure good practice, all decisions made during the assessment 
of an existing screen should be recorded. This shows that the ongoing requirement for 
the screen has been assessed and the performance of the screen is adequate.   
A decision-support register for existing screens is included in Figure 5.1 and it is 
recommended that all assessment decisions and justifications are set out within this, or 
a similar, register to ensure a suitable audit trail. 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 41 ===
 
32  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
 
Figure 5.1  Decision-support register for existing screens. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 42 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
33 
PART THREE – DESIGN, 
MONITORING AND 
OPERATIONAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 43 ===
 
34  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
6 
Evaluation of potential debris 
load 
As with all engineering design, the quality and suitability of the final product relies on 
the quality and usefulness of input data. 
Many factors influence the design of the trash screen. Although the structural elements 
of design will generally be straightforward, it is the layout and size of the screen and 
associated inlet between the watercourse channel and the culvert or other structure 
that will require substantial design effort. 
Key guidance 18: Effective design 
To produce an effective design, it is essential to appreciate: 
• the factors that influence the type and amount of debris; 
• the hydraulic performance of the channel;  
• accessibility and maintainability of the screen. 
6.1 
Types of debris 
The upstream catchment should be examined and the type of debris likely to enter the 
watercourse identified. Table 6.1 indicates the types of debris that may be experienced. 
Table 6.1 Categories of debris. 
Category 
Description 
Small vegetation (Sv) 
Leaves, twigs, garden waste, small branches and plants 
Large vegetation (Lv) 
Trees, large branches, shrubs, mats of weeds 
Domestic refuse (Dr) 
Packaging, small containers (cans, bottles, cartons), 
plastic bags 
Large household refuse (Lhr) 
Furniture, mattresses, carpets 
Large non-domestic refuse (Lndr) 
Cars, shopping trolleys, ladders, pallets, straw bales 
 
The make-up of the debris should be analysed roughly – in the order of the nearest ten 
per cent for each category.  
It is technically straightforward to take a sample of debris and determine the volume 
and weight of the different categories in Table 6.1. This analysis should be undertaken 
over a period of time to verify both the type and rate of accumulation of debris. Such 
sampling should be linked to existing routine and non-routine maintenance visits. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 44 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
35 
6.2 
Evaluation of the catchment 
6.2.1 
Catchment characteristics 
The collection of data on catchment characteristics is necessary to determine the type 
of debris likely to find its way into the watercourse and the predicted amount. 
6.2.2 
Contributing upstream length 
The length of watercourse (and its tributaries) upstream of the culvert that are likely to 
be contributing debris should be measured.  
The total length should be taken to a point where no additional debris can enter. This 
will be the upstream limit of a catchment to a position that prevents debris from passing 
downstream (such as another trash screen or lake). 
6.2.3 
Gradient of watercourse 
The average gradient of the watercourse in design should be determined over the 
contributing upstream length. This is the measurement of the largest stream length in 
the catchment upstream of the culvert – from the culvert to the furthest point upstream 
as defined above. Points at 10 and 85 per cent along this main length are identified and 
the elevation noted. The slope between these two points is then the average gradient, 
which is referred to as ‘S1085’. 
6.3 
Reduction of debris load and illegal dumping 
Possible ways of reducing debris load to reduce the probability of a screen blocking or 
to obviate the need for a screen should be considered at the earliest stage of the 
design process.  
For example, public consultation and community outreach initiatives can significantly 
reduce the occurrence of trash and debris in watercourses.  
The need to provide full flood flow capacity of the channel must be considered in 
conjunction with other legislation that seeks to retain ‘natural’ river beds and banks. 
It is particularly important to consider what debris might be transported into the 
watercourse channel from the channel margins in flood events that are more extreme 
than recent historic floods. 
6.3.1 
Reduction of small vegetation 
A reduction in small vegetation is likely to have a minimal impact on debris load. If 
small vegetation has been identified as a particular hazard at a site, it is probable that 
the contributing upstream length is significant.  
Although it may not be possible to reduce the load at the structure to be protected 
(culvert entrance), it may be possible to construct upstream screens to reduce the load 
at the critical location. Each additional screen would require a maintenance regime. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 45 ===
 
36  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
6.3.2 
Reduction of large vegetation 
A reduction in large vegetation is likely to have a significant impact on debris load.  
It may be possible to reduce the load by routine ‘scavenging’ of the watercourse to 
remove debris and/or the management of upstream vegetation to remove it before it 
becomes debris. Negotiation with riparian owners is necessary for this type of regime.  
Consideration should be given to the environmental benefits of allowing large 
vegetation to accumulate in the floodplain of a watercourse.  
6.3.3 
Reduction of domestic refuse 
Reducing domestic refuse (such as small containers and food packaging) is likely to 
have a significant impact on debris load in urban areas.  
This type of debris is usually placed in a watercourse by riparian owners ‘over the 
garden fence’ or by casual ‘dumpers’ using a known fly-tipping hotspot.  
In urban areas, riparian owners are sometimes unaware of the potential risk caused by 
this type of debris. The risk is made greater if the dry weather flow is insufficient to 
transport the debris, which only becomes mobile under high flow conditions. In this 
situation, a large volume of debris can quickly accumulate at a screen following heavy 
rainfall in the catchment.  
It may be possible to reduce the debris load from domestic refuse by a public 
awareness campaign targeted at riparian owners.  
6.3.4 
Reduction of large household refuse 
Reducing large household refuse (such as furniture, mattresses and carpets) is likely to 
have a significant impact on debris load.  
This type of debris is usually placed in a watercourse by casual ‘dumpers’ making use 
of a known fly-tipping hotspot.  
Enforcement action by the local authority and/or waste regulation staff may be 
necessary to reduce the volume of this kind of debris.  
As with domestic refuse, the risk is made greater if the dry weather flow is insufficient 
to transport the debris, which only becomes mobile under high flow conditions. In this 
situation, a large volume of debris can quickly accumulate at a screen following heavy 
rainfall in the catchment.  
It may be possible to reduce the debris load from large household refuse by a public 
awareness campaign at the fly-tipping hotspot.  
It may be necessary to undertake routine ‘scavenging’ of the watercourse to remove 
debris before it is transported downstream to the screen site. Negotiation with riparian 
owners may be required to implement this type of regime. 
6.3.5 
Reduction of large non-domestic refuse 
Reducing large non-domestic refuse is likely to have a major impact on debris load. 
This type of debris is often associated with industrial land adjacent to the watercourse.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 46 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
37 
If the source of the debris is directly related to the commercial or industrial activity of an 
adjacent site, enforcement action against the site owner should be explored to prevent 
the debris entering the watercourse.  
If the debris is associated with an adjacent site but is not directly related to its activities, 
it may be possible to liaise with the site owner to secure the material and reduce the 
possibility of it becoming debris load.  
If this does not reduce the debris load, it may be possible to create a physical barrier 
between the site and the watercourse to limit the possibility of the debris load entering 
the channel. However, such an option must not compromise the flood flow capacity of 
the watercourse or prevent access for maintenance. 
Key guidance 19: Public engagement 
The first step in addressing a problem caused by the actions of the local community 
is to engage with locals to explore how the problem can be reduced or eliminated.  
No trash screen should be promoted until the alternative of addressing the problem 
at source has been fully explored. 
6.4 
Sediment load 
In general, sediment is not a major problem for the design of screens. However, 
sediment load is intrinsically linked to the geomorphology of the catchment and the 
designer should as far as possible ensure that the design of the screen and culvert 
accommodates this. If it is likely to be a problem for the design of a screen, it can be 
assumed to also be a problem for the structure which the screen protects. 
Any solutions to reduce sediment load are generally site-specific.  
As sediment load is primarily dependent upon source material and flow velocity, the 
opportunity to reduce the volume of sediment falling out of suspension, and hence 
transport, relates primarily to avoiding any change of velocity through the screen site. 
Designers should therefore avoid significant reduction in flow velocity at a screen site. 
If this is not possible, the opportunity to reduce flow velocity upstream of the site should 
be investigated to ensure any sediment accumulates away from the screen.  
The construction of a ‘silt/gravel trap’ is one option in which the velocity is slowed by 
deepening of the channel over a short length. However, this is not an easy solution to a 
sediment problem because it introduces an additional maintenance regime, a 
requirement to dispose of the material removed from the trap and the need to consider 
the overall impact of sediment removal from the watercourse.  
There are further environmental issues related to the construction of a ‘silt/gravel trap’, 
which is likely to have an impact on the geomorphology of the watercourse.  
Such issues include restriction of coarse sediment movement down the channel, and 
artificial widening and slowing of the watercourse in the area of the ‘silt/gravel trap’. 
Cross-channel structures can reduce velocity sufficiently to reduce transport, but can 
act as physical barriers that prevent further downstream transmission of coarse 
sediments (enhanced coarse sedimentation upstream and reduced supply 
downstream). Large reductions in sediment supply can cause a number of 
morphological changes further downstream, primarily increased bed and bank erosion.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 47 ===
 
38  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
7 
Determination of screen area 
7.1 
Components of a screen 
The main components of a trash screen are set out in the section drawing shown in 
Figure 7.1 and the plan drawing in Figure 7.2. Table 7.1 gives details of the main 
components of a screen. 
Figure 7.1  Section drawing of the components of a trash screen. 
Figure 7.2  Plan drawing of the components of a trash screen. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 48 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
39 
Table 7.1 Main components of a screen. 
Component 
Description 
Sloping screen  
This provides the main screen area. 
Horizontal screen  
This provides the main screen area. 
Coarse screen  
This can collect initial larger debris to reduce the impact on, and 
potential damage to, the main trash screen. The coarse screen is often 
located some distance upstream of the main screen, and there may be 
two or more coarse screens at intervals. 
Working platform  
This provides access to the screen for clearance of the trash. Even if it 
is constructed from open tread panels, the area of the working platform 
should not be included as part of the effective screen area (see Figure 
7.3). 
Access gates and 
removable panels  
These provide access to the required sections of the screen to aid trash 
removal. 
Access hatch  
This is provided in the working platform to enable access to the culvert 
for periodic inspection. 
Fencing/handrailing  
This increases security and reduces the hazard associated with a 
potential fall into the channel. 
Access ladder  
This is provided to enable access to the main trash screen and the 
culvert in order to: 
• clear trash from the screen in routine/non-routine events; 
• inspect the culvert;  
• respond to emergency or safety-related issues. 
7.2 
Screen area 
Before determining the screen area required for a site based on the assessment of the 
likely type and amount of debris, it is important for the designer to understand which 
areas of the screen are suitable for inclusion in the calculation of screen area.  
The screen area is the total area of the installation that can collect debris and be 
cleared effectively. Figure 7.3 highlights those areas that can be taken as effective 
screen area, that is those which can convey flow without requiring an unacceptable 
high water level upstream.  
Sections of the trash screen that can contribute to the screen area are limited to the 
inclined/sloping sections of screen along with suitable horizontal sections of screen. 
The screen area on an inclined section is calculated as the actual screen width 
multiplied by the inclined length. Horizontal sections of screen can be included in the 
calculation of screen area only if they are not designed to function as working 
platforms. Working platforms must not be included in the effective screen area as they 
tend to have small bar spacings, or none at all, so are prone to rapid blinding.  
Although the indicative water surface profile is shown horizontal in Figure 7.3, this may 
not necessarily be the case. In particular, the last element of the screen (the upper 
inclined section immediately upstream of the culvert) may not therefore be fully 
effective. The extent to which this occurs will depend on the degree of blockage and its 
distribution on the screen, together with the flow rate at the time.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 49 ===
 
40  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
Detailed hydraulic analysis would be required to determine the water surface profile. 
Designers are therefore urged to avoid being over-optimistic about the effective area of 
a screen when it is both multi-stage and incorporates horizontal sections. 
 
Figure 7.3  Section of a trash screen showing effective screen areas.  
Key guidance 20: Screen area 
To be eligible for inclusion in the effective screen area, an element of the screen: 
i. 
must be below the maximum allowable water level;  
ii. 
must not be a working platform designed for use by operatives;  
iii. 
must not include those parts of the screen obstructed by the supporting 
structure for the screen. 
7.3 
Estimation of required screen area 
The derivation of screen area is fundamentally important if the trash screen is going to 
perform its function (security or prevention of blockage and/or damage to the culvert) 
successfully without increasing the occurrence of flooding.  
The majority of failures that have occurred following the introduction of a new screen in 
a watercourse have been due to underestimation of the screen area required.  
The approach described in this guide is derived from over 15 years of study into the 
performance of trash screens across the UK. Much of the information used to calculate 
screen area is based on empirical research comparing well-performing screens against 
those where problems have been experienced. Factual data on debris amounts against 
upstream catchment characteristics provide the best basis for screen area derivation.  
Caution should be applied in any variation from the evidence-based approach set out in 
Section 7.4. Any such deviation must be supported by data (such as debris amounts 
recorded over a two-year period at the site) and the justification for it recorded.  
The evidence-based method looks at the contributing upstream areas and, using key 
characteristics, estimates the likely amounts of debris arriving at the screen location.  
The method, which is derived from empirical data, has been found to reasonably reflect 
the actual debris amounts arriving at screen sites during bank full events. Asset owners 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 50 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
41 
and designers with limited knowledge of trash screens are often surprised at the large 
design screen areas which result from the evidence-based method.  
7.3.1 
Lower and upper limits to screen size 
Analysis of satisfactorily performing trash screens over the past 15 years has found 
there are lower and upper limits to screen size relative to the size of culvert protected. 
The evidence from the number of screens examined suggests that the design screen 
area should be between three and 30 times the minimum culvert area.  
When applying the evidence-based method: 
• If the calculated screen area is less than three times the minimum culvert 
area, the design area should be increased to three times the culvert area.  
• If the calculated screen area exceeds 30 times the minimum culvert area 
then, provided there are no unusual aspects to the upstream catchment 
which could generate exceptional amounts of debris, the design screen 
area can be capped at 30 times the minimum culvert area.  
Key guidance 21: Screen size 
The design screen area should be determined by using the evidence-based method 
detailed in the guide, checking that the resulting area is between three and 30 times 
the minimum cross-sectional area of the culvert being protected.  
If the calculated area is greater than 30 times the minimum culvert area, a design 
screen area of 30 times the minimum culvert area may be used provided there are 
no unusual aspects to the upstream catchment which would generate exceptional 
amounts of debris entering the watercourse.  
7.4 
Evidence-based method for determining screen 
area 
7.4.1 
Debris amount 
The maximum debris amount (Da) is the anticipated maximum amount of annual debris 
arriving at the screen in non-routine events.  
If there are site-specific data on debris amounts collected over a reasonable period of 
time (say two years or more), these should be used in subsequent calculations.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 51 ===
 
42  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
If no such data are available, a value for Da can be estimated from Figure 7.4 for the 
following catchment types: 
• woodland; 
• urban; 
• suburban; 
• open public areas (including golf courses);  
• open non-public areas (including farmland). 
 
Figure 7.4  Amount of debris expected from different catchment types.  
7.4.2 
Design debris amount 
The design debris amount (Dda) is determined by measuring the contributing length in 
each of the five catchment types and adding the values of Da (from Figure 7.4) to 
provide a total Da.  
Using the average gradient (S1085) of the main contributing upstream length, the total 
value for Da obtained from Figure 7.4 is adjusted according to the rules set out in Table 
7.2. This adjusted value is the total design debris amount (Dda), which is used to 
determine the size of screen as follows. 
0
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
400 
800
1200 
1600 
2000
2400
2800
3200
3600
4000 
4400 
4800
Length of contributing upstream channel (m)
Annual debris (Da) (m
3/year 
Woodland/urban
Suburban/open public areas 
Open non-public areas
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 52 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
43 
Table 7.2 Determining design debris amount. 
Average gradient (S1085) 
Design debris amount (Dda) 
Less than 1 in 250 
1 Da 
One in 250 to 1 in 500 
0.75 Da 
One in 500 to 1 in 1000 
0.5 Da 
Greater than 1 in 1000 
0.25 Da 
7.4.3 
Blinded depth factor 
The next step is to determine the blinded depth factor (Bdf). This is based on the 
predominant catchment type and is intended to reflect the degree of blockage formed 
by the likely debris type on the screen. Table 7.3 is used to determine Bdf. 
If there is a mix of catchment types, then Bdf is an averaged value taking into 
consideration contributing lengths. 
Table 7.3 Blinded depth factor. 
Predominant catchment type 
Blinded depth factor (Bdf) 
Woodland 
0.63 
Urban 
0.23 
Suburban 
0.20 
Open public areas 
0.37 
Open non-public areas (including farmland) 
0.32 
 
 
Figure 7.5  Multi-stage screen at the outlet from a flood storage facility. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 53 ===
 
44  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
Figure 7.5 illustrates a screen which is prone to blinding by vegetation. The degree of 
blockage of the screen may change the hydraulic performance of the outlet of the flood 
storage facility, which is fundamental to its optimum use. Removal of trash from the 
screen is complicated by the fact that there is no disposal area located near to the 
screen.  It demonstrates the importance of accurately assessing the type of debris and 
the debris amount during the design of a screen. 
7.4.4 
Calculation of size of screen 
The size of screen required is obtained by entering the Dda and Bdf for the screen site 
in the equation below, together with the likely number of significant events in the year.  
Design debris amount (Dda) 
Screen area (m2) = 
No. of significant events 
× 
Blinded depth factor (Bdf) 
 
For the purpose of this guide, a significant event is an event that has sufficient flow to 
lift debris off the bed and banks of the watercourse which otherwise would have stayed 
in situ during normal flows. 
The number of significant events should be taken as three. Any variation on this value 
is only allowed if there is evidence from records (such as hydrological data over a 
period of five years) that such a change is justified.  
Key guidance 22: Significant events 
A significant event is an event that has sufficient flow to lift debris off the bed and banks 
of the watercourse.  
Unless there is justification based on hydrological data/records, the number of 
significant events should be taken as three. 
7.5 
Screen layout 
Having determined the area and components of the screen, it is possible to identify the 
potential screen layout. This can then be used for the hydraulic analysis (Section 10).  
The potential layout is likely to develop through a number of iterations. There is no 
standard answer but there will be a layout which, under all design conditions, will 
provide the most efficient solution.  
Information regarding single stage and multiple stage trash screen typical details is 
covered further in Section 11. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 54 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
45 
8 
Selection of optimum bar 
spacing 
8.1 
Importance of bar spacing 
It is essential to select the most appropriate bar spacing to maximise the effectiveness 
of the screen in fulfilling its design objective.  
There is little point in placing a screen across a watercourse that allows material to 
pass of a size that could block the culvert it is protecting. Likewise if the screen is 
intended to exclude children, the screen bars must be spaced so as to prevent a child 
squeezing between them into the culvert. Experience has shown that children are more 
likely to take on the challenge of finding a way through the screen in dry conditions 
rather than being caught by, or washed through, a screen in high flows. The risk to a 
child dramatically increases if he or she has managed to squeeze through a screen into 
a culvert and is then trapped if sudden heavy rainfall occurs upstream.  
There is always a need to determine the minimum spacing between bars necessary to 
exclude material that could potentially block (or in some cases, damage) the culvert or, 
where necessary, to exclude children. However, the spacing should not be reduced 
further to avoid trapping material that would otherwise pass harmlessly downstream.  
Key guidance 23: Bar spacing (general) 
The spacing between the bars of a screen should be the widest commensurate with 
achieving the objective(s). It is counterproductive to have a screen that traps debris 
which would otherwise pass harmlessly through the culvert. The chosen spacing 
must be checked to ensure that it does not conflict with any requirements for the 
passage of fish or wildlife. 
 
Regardless of the spacing of the bars, material will build up on a screen. The rate of 
material collection will be a function of the debris arriving at the screen and the spacing 
of the bars.  
Figure 8.1 shows a coarse screen at the inlet to a flood relief culvert. Despite the large 
spacing between the bars, the screen remains susceptible to collecting large volumes 
of material – much of it of a size that could flow through the culvert without causing 
blockage problems.  
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 55 ===
 
46  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
Figure 8.1  Coarse screen at a flood relief culvert inlet showing degree of debris 
build-up (the ‘Beaverscreen’ effect). 
8.2 
Bar spacing for security screens 
If the screen is required as a security screen (to prevent adults and children entering), 
the clear space between its bars should be 140 mm. This may seem a precise 
measurement, but experience has shown that screens with bars at this spacing 
normally ensure that children are prevented from getting through.  
Key guidance 24: Bar spacing (security screens) 
Security screens should be designed to have a clear space of 140 mm between 
bars. The hydraulic impact of bar spacing must be reviewed and investigated fully. 
 
Caution should be taken in the detailed design of the screen. Design tolerances for 
producing a screen often lead to a spacing greater than the 140 mm recommended. 
This has been a problem where screens abut concrete side walls to the channel. 
Figure 8.2 shows an example where children were able to gain access. 
In addition, there is often a desire to widen the spacing to the edge of the channel to 
assist the movement of animals. This guide recommends that safety should remain 
paramount and the spacing recommended above (140 mm) adhered to. 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 56 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
47 
 
Figure 8.2  Design tolerances allowed children to squeeze between the concrete 
sidewall and the end bar on the screen. 
8.3 
Bar spacing for trash screens 
Trash screens not required to act as security screens generally fall into two categories:  
• those placed upstream of culverts including inverted siphons;  
• those placed at the intake to land drainage pumping stations.  
Trash screens are placed upstream of culverts and inverted siphons to prevent material 
entering that might otherwise cause blockage and subsequent flooding.  This would, in 
turn, threaten the safety of people and property, and could cause more costly damage 
in the culvert or inverted siphon.  
A thorough evaluation should be made of the type and size of material which would, if 
allowed to enter the culvert or inverted siphon, tend to accumulate and form a 
blockage. The following guidance is based on the characteristics of the watercourse 
and the culvert:  
• A small diameter culvert (under one metre, for example) would be at risk 
from twigs and branches in addition to the commonly discarded 
supermarket trolley. In this case, a clear space of 150 mm between bars is 
recommended as the minimum spacing for this type of screen.  
• For an urban location where there is a need to exclude oil drums or sofas, 
but allow smaller debris to pass, a clear space of 300 mm between bars 
may be appropriate.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 57 ===
 
48  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
Key guidance 25: Bar spacing (trash screens) 
Trash screens placed upstream of culverts and inverted siphons should have a 
minimum clear spacing of 150 mm between bars. The spacing should prevent the 
passage of material of the type and size likely to pose a significant risk at the site. 
In urban locations where larger debris needs to be excluded but smaller debris 
should be allowed to pass, spacing of 300 mm between bars may be appropriate. 
8.4 
Bar spacing for weed screens 
Trash screens placed at the intakes to land drainage pumping stations are often 
referred to as weed screens. Their function is primarily to collect floating material that 
could otherwise be drawn into the pumps and affect performance or cause damage.  
It is unusual for large heavy material to accumulate at these pumping stations as the 
velocity of the channels leading to the sites is low. The need to prevent weed and 
similar material entering the pumps results in a screen with more closely spaced bars.  
As with all trash screens, reducing the bar spacing means the screen becomes blocked 
more quickly. Therefore, a regular cleaning regime must be established for this type of 
trash screen. Land drainage authorities, particularly land drainage boards, are well 
aware of this requirement and will establish a system of manual maintenance or 
automatic raking for the screen. It is not appropriate to rely on automatic raking where 
large or heavy material can accumulate at the screen.  
Key guidance 26: Bar spacing (weed screens) 
Trash screens (or weed screens) placed at the intake to land drainage pumping 
stations can be designed with a clear spacing of around 75 mm between bars, 
provided regular cleaning is carried out manually or by an automatic raking system. 
8.5 
Bar spacing on existing screens 
For existing screens, the optimal bar spacing should be in line with the guidance 
provided above, depending on the type of screen required (trash and/or security). 
However, to limit the need to unnecessarily amend efficiently performing trash screens, 
there is no justification to change an existing screen because of its bar spacing.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 58 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
49 
9 
Environmental consequences 
and opportunities 
All responsible authorities should consider both the primary flood risk management 
function of a screen and its environmental context. This covers the ecological status 
and targets for the watercourse and site-specific opportunities for environmental 
improvements. The early involvement of environmental specialists is most likely to 
identify any opportunities. The environmental opportunities will vary between sites and 
will be linked to the degree of environmental risk. 
The potential for screens to have a negative impact on wildlife migration routes was 
highlighted in Section 4.6. Environmental specialists will be required to assess the 
likely impact and advise on mitigation and enhancement measures where a wildlife 
route or the ecological continuity of a watercourse could be interrupted by the 
installation of a screen. In our case, specialists from the National Environmental 
Assessment Service (NEAS) or the Area Fisheries, Recreation and Biodiversity teams 
should be consulted.  
Key guidance 27: Environment 
Designers must have regard to the environment and seek to reduce the impact of the 
screen while also seeking opportunities for environmental gain. However, the primary 
purpose of the screen must not be compromised. 
9.1 
Fish migration 
Only mature salmon species could be discouraged by a screen and the installation of a 
screen on a salmon migration route would be very unusual. Other fish species are 
unlikely to be affected by bars with a minimum clear spacing of 140 mm.  
In reality, fish migration is much more likely to be adversely affected by the presence of 
a culvert – with long, small diameter culverts having the greatest impact. If the negative 
impact on fish migration is a serious environmental concern, removal of the culvert 
should be considered. This would remove the need for a screen and resolve the fish 
migration issue. However, if a security screen is needed for health and safety reasons, 
this must take precedence over opportunities for environmental enhancement. 
9.2 
Aesthetic appearance 
Screens often have a stark visual appearance and may offend the eye, not fitting in 
with the character of the local environment in certain settings. However, a culvert 
entrance is less likely to be found in such a sensitive environment.  
The accumulation of trash on the screen tends to make it even less attractive, but this 
can be reduced by regular cleaning. This process will also improve the environment of 
the watercourse downstream by removing unwanted and unsightly debris. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 59 ===
 
50  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
9.3 
Waste disposal 
The temporary storage of trash and debris removed from a screen will become 
offensive and must be regularly removed from the site and disposed of safely. Trash 
and debris must not be burned at the screen site. 
9.4 
Ecological status 
The Water Framework Directive (WFD) requires that the ecological status of rivers and 
streams is maintained and, where possible, improved. While culverting of a 
watercourse would lower its ecological status, the addition of a screen is unlikely to 
have a measurable impact other than a small increase in the length of channel bed that 
is artificial. Small reductions in ecological status can probably be more than offset by 
local improvements to the channel and such opportunities should be investigated. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 60 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
51 
10 Hydraulic analysis 
10.1 
The importance of hydraulic analysis 
A major concern in the design of a screen is the risk of flooding if the screen becomes 
blocked (partially or completely) with debris. An essential part of the design process is 
to assess what could happen if a trash screen blocks with debris and what can be done 
to mitigate the flood risk. The screen design can then be refined to minimise flood risk. 
Assessment of how a trash screen could cause flooding is a hydraulic problem, 
therefore a hydraulic analysis is required.  
The purposes of the hydraulic analysis are to: 
• check that the screen design is efficient from a hydraulic point of view; 
• assess the impacts of blockages on hydraulic performance of the system; 
• understand the flow velocities associated with the screen in terms of safety;  
• refine the design of the screen so that: 
- it performs efficiently under a range of flow and blockage conditions; 
- the flood risk arising from blockage of the screen is minimised;  
- safety hazards are understood and managed or mitigated. 
To achieve these objectives, the hydraulic analysis should include the screen and the 
structure it ‘protects’ (the system as a whole). The screen and structure cannot be 
considered in isolation. If the screen blocks, the way in which water flows through or 
round the structure must be considered. 
To ensure a trash screen is efficient from a hydraulic point of view, the following issues 
should be considered: 
• the layout of the trash screen will affect the way in which the flow will 
change as the screen blocks; 
• the hydraulic impact of a screen is generally small when the screen is 
clean, but can increase rapidly once debris starts to accumulate; 
• the full design flow should generally pass through the screen (except where 
the design allows flow to bypass the screen when it is blocked by debris);  
• where a screen consists of several screen sections, the screen should be 
designed so that all sections contribute to trapping debris without 
increasing the upstream water levels to a level that would cause flooding.  
10.2 
Design criteria 
Hydraulic structures, including culverts, are normally designed so that the upstream 
water level for a particular ‘design flow’ does not exceed a specified upstream level 
(usually a threshold above which property flooding would occur), plus a freeboard 
allowance.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 61 ===
 
52  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
This design condition should also take account of: 
• additional allowance in capacity for an increase in flow by climate change; 
• additional allowance for greater run-off from development in the catchment; 
• deterioration of the culvert with time (expressed as increasing roughness of 
the culvert barrel);  
• possible blockage of the culvert. 
10.3 
Hydraulic performance 
10.3.1 
Head loss 
The head loss is the pressure needed to drive the flow through (or over) a constriction 
in a channel – in this case a culvert and screen. Head loss represents the difference 
between water levels upstream and downstream of the culvert and screen. The total 
head loss is referred to as the afflux caused by the constriction in a channel. 
The screen contributes to the total head loss through the structure (Figure 10.1). Table 
10.1 lists the components of the head loss from downstream to upstream. 
Table 10.1 Components of head loss. 
Component 
Description 
Outlet head loss 
The loss of flow energy that occurs as the flow expands from the culvert 
into the watercourse downstream of the culvert 
Friction head loss 
The loss of flow energy caused by the friction of the culvert barrel 
surfaces (and bends, transitions and so on within the culvert) 
Inlet head loss 
The loss of flow energy that occurs when the flow contracts from the 
upstream watercourse into the culvert 
Screen head loss 
The loss of energy that occurs when the flow passes through the screen 
 
The proportion of the total head loss through the culvert caused by the screen is small 
for a clean screen (Figure 10.1). 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 62 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
53 
Culvert
Trash 
screen
Screen head loss
Total head loss
Screen 
head  loss
Friction 
head  loss
Inlet head 
loss
Outlet 
head  loss
Downstream 
water level
Upstream water 
level
Culvert – Longitudinal section
Clean screen
Flow direction
Raking 
platform
 
Figure 10.1  Contribution of a clean screen to the total head loss at a culvert.  
The contribution of the screen to the total head loss depends on: 
• the obstruction caused by the bars;  
• the degree of blockage of the screen by debris.  
Once a screen starts to become obscured by debris, the head loss across it increases 
significantly. This is because: 
• the area available for flow through the screen reduces;  
• the constriction to flow caused by the screen and the associated flow 
velocity increases.  
In such circumstances, the head loss across the screen can become significant. The 
impact of blockage by debris is illustrated in Figure 10.2, which shows that the screen 
loss represents the largest component of the overall head loss through the screen.  
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 63 ===
 
54  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
Culvert
Trash 
screen
Screen head loss
Total head loss
Screen 
head  loss
Friction 
head  loss
Inlet head 
loss
Outlet 
head  loss
Downstream 
water level
Upstream water 
level
Culvert – Longitudinal section
Partially blocked screen
Flow direction
Debris
 
Figure 10.2  Impact of debris on partially blocked screen on total head loss.  
Once debris starts to accumulate on a screen, it promotes further trapping of debris 
and a screen can quickly become completely blocked. The impact of this is shown in 
Figure 10.3, where the flow in the watercourse causes flooding and very little flow 
passes through the culvert. If there is no flow path across the obstruction, the flooding 
can be severe as there is no ‘escape route’ for the water. The use of bypass channels 
to avoid this eventuality is discussed in Section 12.  
Culvert
Trash 
screen
Total head loss
Downstream 
water level
Upstream water 
level
Culvert – Longitudinal section
Completely blocked screen
Flow direction
Debris
Flooding over 
the obstruction
 
Figure 10.3  Flooding caused by total blockage of a screen. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 64 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
55 
10.3.2 
Afflux 
The afflux is an increase in water level that can occur upstream of a structure at high 
flows. Afflux can be defined as the maximum difference in water level, at a location 
upstream of a structure, between the structure being in place and it if were to be 
removed.  In other words it is the additional top water level relative to the level that 
would exist if the structure was not present. This is not the same as the head loss (the 
upstream to downstream top water level difference). 
10.4 
Approach to hydraulic analysis 
A screen normally forms an integral part of the overall culvert structure. The hydraulic 
analysis should be carried out for the whole structure plus the associated watercourse 
upstream and downstream, and not just the trash screen. It should cover: 
• design conditions; 
• design process;  
• screen layout; 
• hydraulic calculation;  
• hydraulic modelling;  
• refinement of the screen design. 
These elements are detailed below. 
10.5 
Design conditions 
The design conditions to be considered are: 
• combinations of size of the flow in the watercourse;  
• degree of blockage of the screen. 
The critical design condition for a culvert with a screen is likely to be the coincidence of 
high flow with a significant degree of blockage on the screen.  
10.5.1 
Flow 
The design flows to be used in the design of a screen are as follows. 
• For a new culvert, the screen should be designed for the ‘design flow’ of the 
new culvert. In urban areas, the current design flow is nominally the flow 
with an estimated one per cent chance of being exceeded in any one year 
(‘100-year’ flow) – though the design flow frequency may change as a 
result of project appraisal. An additional allowance is recommended to take 
account of the possible impacts of climate change. This will depend on the 
expected life of the structure, but a design flow 20 per cent higher than the 
current design flow is normally recommended (Defra 2006). 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 65 ===
 
56  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
• For an existing culvert, the design flow is the present capacity of the 
culvert. In practice, the addition of a screen will increase the head loss 
through the culvert and therefore reduce the capacity. 
• In both cases (new or existing culvert), a flow that exceeds the design 
capacity should also be used to assess performance in extreme flood 
conditions. The result of this test can be used to modify the design of the 
system to minimise flood risk. Flow with an estimated 0.1 per cent chance 
of being exceeded in any one year (‘1,000-year’ flow) should be used for 
this test. 
• In addition, performance should be assessed for a more frequently 
occurring event. This will provide operational information on the screen’s 
performance, enabling operational staff to prioritise the screen for cleaning 
during a flood. Flow with an estimated 20 per cent chance of being 
exceeded in any one year (‘five-year’ flow) should be used for this test. 
These recommendations are summarised in Table 10.2. 
Standard methods for predicting flood flows are available and methods for estimating 
flood flows are therefore not provided in this document. The main method used in the 
UK is given in the Flood Estimation Handbook (Institute of Hydrology 1999). This 
provides ‘no data’ methods for estimating flood flows.  
It is normally recommended that the results are reviewed using local data (where 
available) to ensure the flow estimates take account of local conditions. These data 
include flow data from local gauging stations (where available). Flood flow data for 
gauging stations in England and Wales are available from the HiFlows-UK website 
(http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk/hiflowsuk/). However, screens are often on 
small watercourses for which no gauged flow data are available. 
10.5.2 
Blockage 
The area of screen calculated using the evidence-based method described in Section 
7.4 includes an allowance for partial blockage based on observations of screens over a 
number of years. In order to carry out a hydraulic analysis, it is necessary to make 
assumptions about the degree of blockage in any particular flood condition. 
Recommendations about this are included in Table 10.2. 
Table 10.2 Recommended design conditions for the hydraulic analysis of the 
culvert structure. 
Element 
Design condition 
Culvert design flow  
Nominally the 100-year flow for new culverts in urban areas 
plus 20 per cent to allow for climate change 
Culvert design flow with partial 
blockage of the screen  
Blockages of 30 and 67 per cent of the screen area 
Extreme flow  
1,000-year flow plus 20 per cent to allow for climate change 
Frequent flood  
Five-year flow 
Culvert design flow  
With 100 per cent blockage of the screen 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 66 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
57 
10.6 
Design process 
By this stage, an initial design of the screen will have been developed based on the 
screen area calculated in Section 7 and the constraints of the particular site. This initial 
design will show the location and layout of the screen including plans and sections. 
The next step is to undertake hydraulic calculations to: 
• determine the upstream water levels;  
• assess whether the screen achieves the design criteria set in Section 10.2.  
The hydraulic design essentially involves calculating the likely water profile through the 
culvert, screen and the upstream approach channel. The design may be carried out 
using manual calculation methods (see Section 10.8) or modelling (see Section 10.9). 
Feedback from the hydraulic design is used to refine the design of the screen (see 
Section 10.10). 
10.7 
Screen layout 
While the screen layout will depend on the required screen area and local site 
conditions, it is essential that the layout is satisfactory from a hydraulic point of view. 
The hydraulic design is likely to lead to changes to the initial design so that it performs 
efficiently under the range of design conditions and minimises the risk of flooding when 
blocked by debris.  
Ideally flooding should not occur before a screen blocks. Flooding could be mitigated 
by the introduction of a bypass route as discussed in Section 12. The normal 
alternative flow path is over the screen, but the banks of the channel upstream of the 
screen must be high enough to accommodate the flow (including upstream backwater 
effects).  
Particular problems arise at urban screens, where debris loads are high and space is 
limited. Two possible approaches to achieving a large screen area in a confined 
location are to have: 
• a long screen located diagonally across the watercourse (where space is 
limited this might be almost parallel to the watercourse);  
• a long screen running parallel to the watercourse where the flow is 
effectively transferred sideways into a parallel channel.  
Even in these cases, where there is a large screen area, there should be a flow route 
over the screens in case of blockage. 
One problem with long screens located diagonally in narrow channels is that they 
reduce the cross-section of the channel. Large debris could block the narrowing 
channel, rendering much of the trash screen ineffective. Ideally, the channel cross-
section upstream of any part of the screens should not be reduced. In addition, any 
screen that requires the flow to change direction introduces another head loss and 
increases the propensity of the screen to trap small debris. Such arrangements cannot 
be used as an easy way to keep water levels within banks or to achieve the design 
screen area. 
Another approach to preventing screen blockages where large amounts of debris occur 
is to introduce one or more coarse screens some distance upstream of the culvert, in 
order to remove large items of debris. This is the equivalent of the ‘boulder trap’ often 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 67 ===
 
58  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
found in mountainous areas. Such screens will require a hydraulic design to check that 
the watercourse walls and banks are high enough to prevent flooding if the screen 
blocks. In such cases, flow would normally pass over the screen which would behave 
as a weir. 
The screen layout should be designed so that flooding cannot occur if only part of the 
screen is blocked. Figure 10.4 shows a design which attempts to provide a large 
screen area in a narrow channel. However, only part of the screen is used before 
flooding occurs. In such cases, a detailed hydraulic analysis is necessary to determine 
the hydraulic performance under a range of flows and blockage conditions. 
Example of a trash screen on a narrow channel:
Longitudinal section 
A
B
C
D
The way in which this arrangement would perform is as follows:
1.
Screens A and B (which form a small part of the total screen area) are likely to block first.
2.
Flow then passes through screen C but the constricted flow area between screens B and 
C leads to flooding.  The screen is now behaving as a weir.
3.
Flooding occurs before screen D becomes effective.
4.
A mitigation measure is to raise the walls.  This will be needed for some distance 
upstream.
5.
A hydraulic analysis is needed to calculate water levels under a full range of flows and 
blockage conditions to determine wall levels, etc.
Water surface 
under high flow 
conditions
Screen 
sections (A, B, 
C and D)
Wall top level
 
Figure 10.4  Flooding caused by partial blockage of a trash screen in a narrow 
channel. 
10.8 
Hydraulic calculation 
The most comprehensive study of culvert performance was by the US Federal 
Highways Administration (FHWA). The results of this study are given in a design guide 
FHWA (1985), which forms the basis of the method provided in the Culvert Design 
Guide developed by CIRIA (1997). This method is used for calculating the head loss 
caused by a culvert including the trash screen. This guide is currently being updated to 
the Culvert Design and Operations Guide which will be published in 2009. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 68 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
59 
The Afflux Estimation System (AES) has been developed by UK operating authorities 
(see Section 10.9.1) to provide a computer-based tool to estimate afflux at bridges and 
culverts. For culverts, AES includes methods shared with the FHWA and CIRIA guides. 
It is intended that AES will be updated alongside the new CIRIA guide to include a 
method for calculating afflux that takes account of trash screen blockage. This will then 
allow rapid calculation of head loss through screens as well as culverts. 
10.9 
Hydraulic modelling 
Hydraulic modelling can be used to estimate water levels at the screen and methods 
are available for any screen configuration. However, before carrying out any modelling 
it is necessary to confirm that modelling is required. In many cases, it will be possible to 
undertake the required hydraulic analysis manually using the guidance in this 
document and its associated references.  
The decision whether to use modelling will depend on: 
• the complexity of the analysis; 
• the availability of data;  
• the ease with which the modelling can be carried out.  
An important benefit of modelling is the ability to model a range of different conditions 
quickly once the model is set up. 
Whichever approach is adopted, an initial hydraulic design of the screen is advised to 
ensure: 
• the model (or other hydraulic calculation) covers all the design cases;  
• each design case is correctly represented within the model.  
It is particularly important to consider how the screen (including blockages) should be 
represented in the model. This involves identifying the locations where upstream water 
levels are ‘controlled’ for different design cases.  
Key guidance 28: Hydraulic analysis 
Depending on the complexity of the site and availability of data, various levels of 
hydraulic analysis can be carried out.  
In many cases manual hydraulic analysis may be sufficient. If the analysis is 
complex, data is available and modelling can be carried out relatively easily, 
hydraulic modelling may be the preferred approach. 
 
In the example in Figure 10.4, the upstream water level is initially controlled by the 
culvert but, as screens A and B begin to block, these become the control on upstream 
water levels. When screens A and B are fully blocked, the control becomes the weir 
between screens B and C. If screen C becomes fully blocked, the control becomes the 
weir between screens B and D. Each control should be represented in the model so 
that it is able to predict upstream water levels for the full range of flows and blockage 
conditions. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 69 ===
 
60  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
It is strongly recommended that a screen is modelled as a separate discrete unit so 
that conditions upstream and downstream of the screen can be clearly identified from 
the model results. The discrete representation may include the following elements: 
• energy loss representing flow through the screen – where there are several 
screen sections (as in the example in Figure 10.4) a separate loss may be 
required for each screen section or group of sections; 
• weir representing flow over the screen (where appropriate); 
• orifice representing flow over the screen (where appropriate);  
• bypass routes (where appropriate). 
When applying a computational hydraulic model, the designer must be able to 
represent the relevant elements in the model. The model should include the culvert and 
screen as separate discrete units. In the example in Figure 10.4, it is important to 
include the screen losses and a weir to represent flow over the top of the screens. 
The leading hydraulic modelling software packages include methods for modelling 
culverts. These methods are summarised in Table 10.3 for the three most commonly 
used hydraulic modelling software packages in the UK. All three models use one-
dimensional hydraulics and the designer needs to assess values for coefficients for 
non-standard cases (such as screens that are not perpendicular to the flow).  
The designer must also be able to check that the model predictions are reasonable. 
Separate calculations should be carried out to provide a check on the model results. 
Table 10.3 Culvert and trash screen modelling capability of hydraulic modelling 
software. 
Software 
Culvert and trash screen modelling capability 
ISIS 
Method described in the Culvert Design Guide (CIRIA 1997). Screens can be 
modelled as separate units with overflow weirs and other elements as required. 
ISIS was updated to include Afflux Estimation System (AES) in 2007 
HEC-RAS 
US Federal Highways Administration method (FHWA 1985) 
MIKE11 
Components of culverts represented by orifice units and energy losses 
Other  
Bespoke software developed for channel conveyance may be appropriate, but 
needs to be carefully considered 
 
Key guidance 29: Hydraulic modelling 
When using computational hydraulic models, it is essential that the designer 
understands the calculation process in the model and ensures the design is 
represented correctly.  
It is the responsibility of the designer to ensure the hydraulic model is capable of 
modelling the proposed design for all flow and blockage scenarios. 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 70 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
61 
It is difficult to model complex arrangements of culverts and screens accurately using 
computational models. This is often because there are interactions between the flow 
through different screen elements or the flows are three-dimensional. Examples 
include: 
• a culvert on a bend, where there may be a very uneven distribution of flow 
across the screen which affects the way in which silt and debris accumulate 
(this also applies to screens that are not placed at right angles to the flow 
direction);  
• the one shown in Figure 10.4, where flow over the screen drops vertically 
through screen sections C and D and then combines with flow through 
screen sections A and B.  
In such cases, it may be better to use a physical model of the culvert and screen, with 
a scale large enough to avoid scale effects in the modelling.  
Figure 10.5 shows the results obtained with a two-dimensional model used in the 
design of a screen on the River Sheaf in Sheffield. 
'sf3c.ou1'
54
54.5
55
55.5
56
56.5
57
57.5
58
'sf3c.ou2'
 
Figure 10.5 Two-dimensional hydraulic model used to aid the design of a screen 
on the River Sheaf (diagonal alignment to flow). 
10.9.1 
Conveyance and Afflux Estimation Systems (CES/AES) 
The UK operating authorities involved in flood risk management have developed 
methods and software to estimate water levels in channels and at bridges and culverts. 
These packages are the Conveyance Estimation System (CES) and Afflux Estimation 
System (AES).  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 71 ===
 
62  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
They have been combined in a single, stand-alone water level estimation software 
application available to Environment Agency staff and for download at http://www.river-
conveyance.net, where supporting documentation can also be found. The CES is also 
generally available within ISIS and InfoWorks (AES may be included subsequently). 
• Conveyance Estimation System (CES) This comprehensive software 
package allows the user to estimate the flow capacity (conveyance) of any 
reach of channel given data on the dimensions, form and vegetation. 
• Afflux Estimation System (AES) This package is designed to allow the 
estimation of the hydraulic impact of a bridge or a culvert on a watercourse. 
The software will estimate the increase in water level upstream as a result 
of the constriction caused by the bridge or culvert for a given flow condition. 
AES does not currently include a trash screen module or methods for complex culverts 
(such as those with multiple changes in barrel section or junctions). However the AES 
does model a full range of flow modes ranging from free flow to surcharged flow, and 
blockage could be simulated approximately by assuming reduced inlet dimensions.  
In common with all software packages, the analysis incorporates certain assumptions, 
some of which can be user-defined. Before such a package is used for hydraulic 
analysis, it is vital to ensure it is fit for purpose, and that the assumptions made are 
appropriate to the problem being analysed. 
10.10 Refinement of screen design 
The results of the hydraulic analysis should be used to refine the design of the screen 
and the associated engineering works. This may include: 
• improved design and operational criteria for the screen (where the degree 
of blockage can be related to upstream levels and flood risk); 
• adjusting upstream walls and bank levels so that design flows can be 
accommodated even if blockage occurs;  
• designing bypass routes and other mitigation measures to reduce the 
likelihood of flooding if the screen blocks. 
The hydraulic analysis should also cover design details that could improve the 
hydraulic performance of the screen and culvert and the management of safety 
hazards such as: 
• avoiding areas where sediment could accumulate and affect the hydraulic 
performance; 
• maintenance requirements for the overall structure;  
• understanding flow velocities in normal and extreme conditions in and 
around the screen and culvert. 
Key guidance 30: Refinement of screen design 
 
The results of the hydraulic analysis should be used to refine the design of the 
screen and the associated engineering works. 
It should also help to improve the hydraulic performance of the screen and culvert 
and inform the management of safety hazards.  
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 72 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
63 
11 Detailed design of a screen 
The design of a trash screen will be unique for each site and depend on a wide variety 
of factors. It is essential to: 
• identify the critical factors in the design of the complete installation;  
• record the decisions as to how these factors have been addressed. 
The design of a screen should not just focus on reducing flood risk. Although this is the 
main factor, the following must also be taken into account: 
• health and safety of operatives and the general public; 
• involvement of the CDM coordinator1 for the project; 
• amenity;  
• ecological and environmental impacts, including possibilities for 
enhancement. 
The main aspects to be considered in the detailed design of a screen are discussed 
below. We have produced typical detail design drawings for a single stage, two stage 
and coarse screen which can be used as an aid to the design of the screens. Although 
these are not definitive they provide guidance on the typical layout and design 
requirements which can be incorporated. The typical detail drawings are available 
internally at:  
http://eams.ea.gov/EAMS/How_We_Work/main/agencydocument19532.htm and 
http://eams.ea.gov/EAMS/How_We_Work/main/agencydocument19541.htm 
 
Figure 11.1  A recently installed screen in an urban setting. 
                                                     
1 A CDM coordinator is a role under the Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 2007 (see 
http://www.hse.gov.uk/construction/cdm.htm) 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 73 ===
 
64  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
Figure 11.1 shows a recently installed screen comprising two stages and a small 
horizontal screen section to the rear of the lower working platform. The screen has 
been fitted to the sloping sides of the channel and access steps have been provided to 
both platforms. The support structure for the screen and platforms has intruded into the 
channel bed - this will introduce an additional head loss.  
An access hatch has been built into the culvert through the upper working platform (top 
right of photo). The site is fenced and has lighting to facilitate working during the hours 
of darkness. Water levels are monitored and telemetered to an operations centre. This 
trash screen has incorporated a number of ‘good practice’ design features.  
11.1 
Screen cleaning 
It is essential that the arrangements for cleaning the screen are appropriate to the 
nature and quantity of the debris anticipated at the site. 
11.1.1 
Screen position 
The screen position depends on: 
• required design size;  
• location of the structure to be protected from debris.  
Whatever the size of screen, it should be possible for operatives to safely rake it under 
routine and most non-routine conditions. It may not be possible to rake the screen if it 
is drowned, but the design should afford operatives early and safe access to the screen 
once water levels subside. If there is risk of flood damage to adjacent areas, there 
should be contingency arrangements for screen clearance (vehicle-mounted grabs). 
11.1.2 
Method of screen cleaning 
There are three systems for cleaning screens: 
• manually using suitably hooked rakes; 
• mechanically by specific grab systems or mobile plant (e.g. hiab lorries);  
• mechanically by automated screen-clearing mechanisms. 
Each of these systems should be evaluated separately. However, a mechanical system 
is generally justifiable only in special circumstances – especially given the poor record 
of this system on screens protecting culverts on rivers in urban environments. 
The raking of screens against a significant head of water (during a non-routine event) is 
usually difficult and can be dangerous for operatives. Screen design should endeavour 
to minimise manual clearing and provide safety arrangements at the installation. 
Manual handling risk assessments should be completed for both routine and non-
routine clearance. 
An automated mechanical screen-clearing mechanism is suitable for sites where the 
debris load is fairly consistent and builds up more quickly than can be cleared 
manually.  
Issues associated with the use of an automated mechanism include: 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 74 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
65 
• health and safety hazards associated with unauthorised access; 
• inability of the mechanism to cope with unusual debris;  
• reliability of the mechanical and electrical equipment in adverse weather 
conditions.  
If an automated mechanism is used, its performance should be remotely monitored. 
The use of hiab lorries in the mechanical cleaning of a screen can fulfil two 
requirements. They can be used to clear the screen by removing debris from the 
channel, and can then transport debris away from the site for proper disposal.  
11.1.3 
Removal of large items 
In some locations, it may be necessary to remove large objects (usually a result of fly-
tipping) from the watercourse. The designer should consider the likelihood of this 
occurring and the best method for dealing with it.  
If access is straightforward, bringing suitable mobile plant to site should suffice.  
If access is difficult, it may be necessary to have specialist equipment on-site (such as 
winches and grabs). If this is the case, these should not obstruct the normal clearing 
arrangements and access ways. 
Key guidance 31: Screen-cleaning arrangements 
Arrangements for cleaning the screen must be appropriate to the nature and quantity 
of the debris anticipated at the site. 
It should be possible for operatives to safely rake a screen under routine and most 
non-routine conditions. If a screen is drowned it may not be safe to clear, however 
the design should afford operatives early and safe access to the screen once water 
levels subside. 
Each method for screen cleaning should be evaluated separately and the design 
should minimise manual clearing and provide suitable safety arrangements. 
11.1.4 
Rake details and reach 
Manual clearance is traditionally undertaken using hooked rakes with three or four 
prongs. The efficiency of raking depends on the ability of the operator. The main factor 
is the stretching required to rake the screen.  The operator should be comfortable with 
the reach required. A two-metre rake length has been found to be the maximum, with 
1.5 metres being the preferred length. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 75 ===
 
66  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
The design of the rake should be matched to the screen in question, although it is 
impractical and inefficient to have a different rake for each screen. The prong length 
should be enough to allow a firm grip on the debris being raked, but not so long that the 
prongs snag on the screen cross members (especially at the top of the screen where 
the bars turn over onto the working platform). A maximum prong length of 150 mm is 
suggested.  
The width of the rake head should not be so wide as to require excessive raking effort. 
Rake heads wider than about 450 mm are usually impractical.  
The prong spacing should be such that the prongs fall naturally between the screen 
bars. A prong spacing of 150 mm would meet most circumstances but, for smaller 
debris, 75 mm may be preferable.  
Large items (such as armchairs, timber pallets and tree trunks) cannot be readily 
removed with a rake. 
Key guidance 32: Rake reach and prong length 
Maximum rake length is two metres, with 1.5 metres being the preferred length. 
A maximum prong length of 150 mm is suggested. Rake heads wider than about 450 
mm are usually impractical.  
11.2 
Height of screen and need for stages 
To enable clearance to be carried out safely and comfortably a single screen length 
(dimension parallel to the bars) should be limited to two metres (preferably shorter).  
To accommodate a greater area, further stages should be added to the design with 
working platforms between each stage.  
To enable manual handling of debris from one working platform up to the next, the 
vertical distance between platforms should not exceed 1.2 m. 
11.3 
Screen bars 
Although screen bars must be robust to resist vandalism, narrow bars are preferable 
because of the reduced impact on stream hydraulic performance. Bar design is 
therefore a compromise between strength and hydraulic impact. 
Flat bars are preferred to round bars because they offer strength with minimal hydraulic 
impact.  
Bar dimensions should generally not be less than 8 × 75 mm for flat bars. Thicker (10 
or 12 mm) bars may be advisable where extra strength is required. Attempting to save 
money by making the bars as slender as possible is a false economy. 
Rounding the upstream edges of the bars will slightly improve the hydraulic 
performance and may reduce the propensity for the screen to trap small debris. 
However, the additional expense of rounding the edges of mild steel flats may be 
difficult to justify. The use of round bars to achieve the same effect is self-defeating 
because the bar diameter will be much greater than the width of a mild steel flat of the 
same bending resistance. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 76 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
67 
The maximum unsupported length of a bar should not exceed 1.5 m. Bracing should be 
provided if the bar length exceeds 1.5 m. Bracing members should be recessed behind 
the screen to avoid interference with the passage of a cleaning rake. 
 
Figure 11.2  A debris screen on a small culvert.  
In Figure 11.2 the screen arrangement could be improved by making full use of the 
inlet structure by making the slope of the screen less steep.  It is also important to note 
that the bracing member mid-way up the bars is recessed so that it does not interfere 
with raking of the screen. 
The bottom of the bar should be fixed to a horizontal member. The horizontal member 
may either be embedded in the channel bed or be raised above the bed. The height of 
the bottom horizontal member above the bed should be similar to the bar spacing 
dimension for a trash screen, and no more than 140 mm for a security screen. 
The top of the bar should have a return length which is fixed to the top horizontal 
member. The return length should be sufficient to enable the tines of the rake to remain 
clear of the horizontal member. 
Galvanized mild steel is generally considered to be the most efficient construction 
material for screen bars. 
Key guidance 33: Screen bars 
Bar dimensions should not be less than 8 x 75 mm for flat bars. 
Maximum unsupported length of a bar should not exceed 1.5 m. Recessed bracing 
should be provided if bar length exceeds 1.5 m. 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 77 ===
 
68  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
Figure 11.3  Trash screen in a public park. 
Figure 11.3 shows a trash screen where the bar spacing on the screen has been 
designed to collect large debris. The top of the bars also include a return to enable 
debris to be raked onto the working platform. The bar return is too shallow and does 
not allow the tines of the long handled drag rake to clear the front edge of the working 
platform. 
11.4 
Screen alignment 
The plan alignment of the screen would normally be at right angles to the flow as this 
provides for debris collection across the full width of the screen. If this arrangement 
together with multiple stages cannot provide the required screen area, it may be 
feasible to place the screen diagonally across the channel. In this instance, the impact 
on both the hydraulics and debris load should be considered in detail. 
For the full area of a diagonally oriented screen to be effective, flow direction has to 
change twice in its passage through the screen – the greater the skew of the screen, 
the more difficult the flow path. This increases the head loss through the screen and 
increases the propensity for the screen to block with small debris – both of which must 
be allowed for in the design.  
A diagonal screen in a narrow channel also carries the risk that debris will block the 
channel part way along the screen, making the arrangement ineffective. The adoption 
of a diagonal screen is not an easy way to increase screen area – it requires detailed 
hydraulic appraisal before being accepted as a solution for a site. 
Figure 11.4 shows a screen on the River Sheaf in Yorkshire with a diagonal alignment 
to flow. Two-dimensional hydraulic modelling (see Figure 10.5) was required before 
and during the design of this screen to ensure this was a suitable option. 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 78 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
69 
 
Figure 11.4  Screen on the River Sheaf with diagonal alignment to flow. 
11.5 
 Angle of screen 
The screen should be placed at a preferred angle of 45° and a maximum of 60° to the 
horizontal.  
Angles to the horizontal of less than 45° tend to result in a working platform that 
becomes drowned out very quickly during high flows and is unsafe. 
Angles steeper than 60° present operatives with a high manual handling risk. 
Mechanical installations fall outside these guidance limits. The designer will therefore 
need to ensure there is suitable reason to depart from this guidance.  
11.6 
Fabrication and materials, fixings and 
fastenings 
Wherever possible and in line with our waste minimisation programme, the design of 
the screen should include the reuse of materials if a screen is to be rehabilitated or 
repaired. 
Selection of material for the installation should take into consideration the local area, 
for example, the need to consider durability and likelihood of theft if the trash screen is 
to be located in an urban area.  
 
 
 
 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 79 ===
 
70  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
Key guidance 34: Fabrication and materials 
The materials from which a screen and its associated platforms and support 
structure are made should be robust and durable. This is important because the 
screen often has to perform in a challenging environment (such as corrosion, 
vandalism, debris loads, cleaning process).  
Galvanized steel has been shown over a long time to meet these requirements. 
Designers wishing to adopt alternative materials must be confident of their ability to 
remain serviceable for a significant period (for example, 30 years). 
11.7 
Working platforms 
11.7.1 
Platform depth 
In the context of this guide, platform depth is defined as the distance between the 
upstream and downstream edges of the working space.  
Platform depth should allow operatives to rake the screen by moving from the front to 
the rear of the platform in comfort and allow for some temporary storage. The depth of 
platform should therefore be of similar dimensions to the rake reach required (see 
Section 11.1.4). It is unlikely that the depth of a platform would be less than 1.5 m or 
greater than 2.5 m. 
11.8 
Health and safety provisions 
The main health and safety issue associated with a screen site is the requirement to 
maintain, through a number of provisions, the safety of the public and operatives 
working on the site – both day and night, in high and low flow conditions.  
A health and safety file should be completed for all new structures as part of the design 
requirements of the Construction (Design and Management) Regulations (CDM) 2007 
http://www.opsi.gov.uk/si/si2007/20070320.htm (Health & Safety Executive 2007). 
Particular attention must be given to hand rails, fencing, ladders and step irons to 
ensure they are operationally acceptable while meeting current regulatory standards. 
Key guidance 35: Health and safety 
It can help operatives if the screens for which they are responsible have common 
features (such as the design of anchorages for safety harnesses). However, health 
and safety issues cannot be addressed with ‘standard’ designs.  
Health and safety provisions must be bespoke, that is, they should be designed for 
the screen in question and its particular operational requirements, making use of 
standard equipment where appropriate. 
11.8.1 
Safety harnesses 
Safety harnesses should accommodate the range of operative movement expected on 
the raking platform in both routine and non-routine circumstances. Suitable anchoring 
points for operatives’ safety harnesses should be mounted at the rear of the raking 
platform.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 80 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
71 
In some cases, the installation of hand rails at the front of the working platform prohibits 
the raking of the screen. Use of a hook-on system where the operatives secure 
harnesses to an anchoring point is the preferred option.  
Anchoring points can include eyebolts and/or anchor posts. Depending on the layout of 
the site, there may need to be a series of these. 
11.8.2 
Warning notices 
Depending on the designed level of the working platform(s), clearly visible water-level 
warning boards should be displayed indicating when it would be unsafe to access the 
platform. This is a particularly important feature on lower levels of staged screens and 
has important implications when a maintenance team is unfamiliar with the site (see 
also Section 11.8.4). 
Both the public and operatives should be made aware of the principal hazards, 
including high velocities caused by partial blockage. It is possible for these to trap an 
individual against the screen. 
11.8.3 
Lighting 
Lighting must be provided at any site where it is necessary to carry out maintenance 
activities in the dark. 
Under no circumstances should operatives be permitted to work on the screen in 
darkness. 
Suitable lighting provisions are identified as follows:  
• if a suitable mains power supply is not locally available, consider a mobile 
generator; 
• mobile lighting may be appropriate in locations subject to vandalism; 
• permanent brackets can be installed at the site from which portable lighting 
can be fixed temporarily; 
• if the above lighting arrangements are not possible, hand-held or cap 
lamps/head torches must be provided;  
• there may be an environmental impact as a result of lighting provision. 
Key guidance 36: Lighting provision 
Under no circumstances should operatives be permitted to work on the screen in 
darkness. 
11.8.4 
Water depth indicator 
Operatives may be called out to a site with which they are not familiar. They may arrive 
to find the trash screen submerged by high water levels, making it unclear as to the 
depth of water in the channel. It is therefore essential to provide a water depth indicator 
to help operatives decide whether it is safe to clear the screen or not. This can be in 
the form of stage boards or similar, located upstream of, or in line with, the screen. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 81 ===
 
72  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
11.8.5 
Health and safety design review 
In the final design check, it is important to ensure: 
• generic and site-specific health and safety issues have been adequately 
addressed; 
• there has been sufficient consultation to alleviate all concerns. 
11.9 
Access to the screen 
There are two fundamental design requirements for access to the screen: 
• access to the screen must allow cleaning and maintenance operations to 
take place in both routine and non-routine situations;  
• the screen should be safe for maintenance and operational staff to work on 
both day and night. 
11.9.1 
Site location 
Site location is likely to be related to the culvert entrance, which is normally already set. 
While some screens can be placed upstream of the culvert and have separate access 
provisions (such as an overtoppable coarse debris screen), most cases will require 
access to the screen in the vicinity of the culvert entrance.  
11.9.2 
Site access 
In the majority of cases, vehicle and pedestrian access will be needed. Access should 
accommodate the removal of collected debris.  
If direct access from the public highway does not already exist, the preferred solution is 
to construct a new access.  
A permanent, hard and even surface should be provided in all cases.  
Designers must avoid compromising the functioning of the screen by not making proper 
provision for access for routine maintenance and emergency cleaning operations. 
11.9.3 
Screen access 
A suitable, safe hard-standing area for vehicles and/or operatives should be provided 
at the end of the site access road. There should be a clearly designated route from this 
area to screen raking platform(s), and areas that will require regular maintenance.  
In addition, the route must be free from: 
• tripping hazards; 
• unexpected rises or falls; 
• obstructions to passage;  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 82 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
73 
• obstacles that would require unnecessary stretching or bending by 
operatives.  
11.10 Storage of debris 
11.10.1 Transfer of debris to storage area 
The screen should be designed such that debris can be transferred easily to the 
working platform. Once on the platform, the debris should not impede continuing 
operations to clear the screen.  There should be a clear transfer route from the platform 
to a temporary storage area off the working area.  
11.10.2 Temporary storage of debris 
Cleared screen debris needs to be stored temporarily in a holding area before transfer 
off-site (see also Section 13.4).  
The storage area should be: 
• remote from the screen itself so there is no possibility of debris migrating 
back to the screen or watercourse;  
• located to make transfer from screen to storage straightforward for 
operatives.  
Provided the debris is stored temporarily (up to 72 hours) within the boundaries of the 
site, the activity will not be subject to waste regulations.  
The capacity of the storage area should reflect the likely volume of debris in a non-
routine event. This volume will have been calculated for the evaluation of potential 
debris load in Section 6. It may be prudent to provide a safety margin, especially if 
events are frequent and transportation of debris away from the site is difficult. 
11.11 Visual amenity issues 
Where any new or remedial works can be justified, the opportunity for visual and other 
environmental enhancements should be identified and implemented (including fencing 
and planting). This is likely to involve liaison with specialist environmental staff. 
11.12 Security arrangements 
Security arrangements are also discussed in Section 11.14 on CCTV. 
The site must be provided with a level of security appropriate to the characteristics of 
the local area, and type of screen to be installed.  
The primary considerations are whether there are potential issues with children 
accessing the site and the type of equipment to be kept on the site. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 83 ===
 
74  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
11.12.1 Fencing 
Careful consideration should be given to fencing the screen from public access. Certain 
hazards will require the area to be fenced such as: 
• deep water; 
• moving mechanical parts;  
• significant fall heights.  
If fencing is not possible (due to the potential for vandalism, channel geometry and so 
on), these safety hazards must be mitigated in some other way.  
To discourage entry to the channel and the culvert, experience has shown that 
artificially increasing the depth of the water upstream of the culvert entrance is 
beneficial. This can be achieved by lowering the channel bed or by providing a crump 
weir which will hold the water back and create greater depth.  
When designing fencing for security around a site, reference should be made to the 
appropriate part of BS 1722:2006 for guidance on the specification (BSI 2006). The BSI 
1722 series specifies requirements for different types of fencing as appropriate.  
11.12.2 Culvert entrance enclosure 
If a screen is required for security reasons, the culvert entrance should be totally 
enclosed by the screen (where possible). Total closure means the gaps at the side 
walls must not be larger than the bar spacing for the screen in question. 
11.12.3 Access to the culvert 
Access should be provided within the screen arrangement to allow authorised 
personnel to gain access to the culvert and to the rear of the screen.  
The access cover should be integral to the screen construction, but not impede the 
function of the screen.  
There should be fixing arrangements to secure the access cover in the open position to 
remove the risk of injury to people using it. 
There should also be safe access arrangements to enter the culvert (such as a ladder, 
handholds, locks, keys, stepping-off area).  
Cast-in step-irons are not considered appropriate. If a permanent ladder fixing is not 
feasible, ladder stops should be cast or bolted into the culvert invert and a fixing 
provided for the head of the ladder.  
11.13 Water-level monitoring 
Requirements for water-level monitoring to reduce risk are also covered in Section 4.7. 
Water-level monitoring can act as a means of alerting the organisation responsible for 
maintaining the screen to a potential blockage to the screen in a non-routine event – 
whether this is due to a natural build-up of debris or is the result of vandalism.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 84 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
75 
Any proposed screen site with a consequence score of four or above (see Section 4.7 
and key guidance 15) must have remote water-level monitoring installed, linked by 
telemetry to an operational centre as an integral part of the scheme. In addition, the 
installation of CCTV at the site should be considered.  
At all other sites, remote water-level monitoring must be considered as part of the 
design risk assessment. Remote monitoring can be omitted only where risk can be fully 
mitigated or the consequence is negligible. 
When the difference in level is linked to telemetry, it can raise an alarm as the 
difference increases beyond pre-determined values. Water-level differential is a very 
good indicator of debris build-up and hence a requirement to clear.  
Water-level monitors may be subject to vandalism and need to be protected.  
The designer should consider installation of water-level monitors just upstream and 
downstream of a screen, with the data from this water-level monitoring providing 
information on the top water level drop or difference across the screen. The Field 
Monitoring and Data team should be consulted fully.  
Reliable water-level monitoring with automated alarms will enable maintenance teams 
to respond quickly to rising water levels and potential blockage of a screen. 
If water-level monitoring was previously available at the site, the data obtained may 
provide useful information on screen performance to the designer.  
Any proposal to include or use water-level monitoring at an installation will require 
consultation with and approval from the appropriate body. In the case of our screens, 
this will be the regional telemetry team. 
11.14 CCTV 
The use of CCTV must be considered as an integral part of the scheme at any 
proposed screen site with a consequence score of five (see Section 4.7 and key 
guidance 15) together with remote water-level monitoring.  
Incorporating a CCTV system into the design of a screen site (particularly for high risk 
areas) enables operatives to monitor the situation at the site for changes in river levels 
and for specific issues related to unexpected blinding of the screen.  
If there are health and safety hazards associated with a site (including vandalism) 
CCTV can be used as a deterrent and/or to monitor the site.  
To monitor screen blockages, CCTV can be linked to water-level monitoring so that it 
becomes activated only when water levels become high. 
Any Environment Agency site where the introduction of CCTV is planned will require 
consultation with both the Mechanical and Electrical team (MEICA) and the Field 
Monitoring and Data team to ensure proposals are practical, and that any potential 
expansion in power requirements for a site can be achieved.  
The installation of CCTV equipment may require planning permission.  
It is also vital that resources are available for remote monitoring of the site and taking 
any action. To be of value, CCTV should be linked via telemetry to an operating centre 
capable of responding to vandalism or screen blockage. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 85 ===
 
76  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
12 Screen bypass 
12.1 
Justification for the provision of a screen 
bypass 
There are two main options for a screen bypass: 
• a screen bypass that takes flow round the screen only;  
• a full bypass that conveys flow round the screen and culvert, returning it to 
the channel downstream of the culvert. 
In both cases, the aim is to ensure that the flow in the watercourse is passed safely 
downstream in the event of the screen becoming blocked. The bypass ensures that 
flow remains in bank in the watercourse, reducing the risk of flooding. 
The justification for providing a bypass is to avoid flooding if the screen becomes 
blocked. A simple assessment of the likely damage that would be caused by flooding (if 
no bypass were provided) compared with the cost of a screen bypass will indicate 
whether a bypass is worthwhile. 
Key guidance 37: Screen bypass 
The need for a screen bypass can often be avoided by adopting a sound design for 
the screen and ensuring a proactive maintenance regime so that the likelihood of 
blockage is reduced to an acceptable level.  
12.2 
Alternative bypass arrangements 
A full bypass is only likely to be justifiable if the consequences of flow coming out of 
bank upstream of the culvert are severe (for example, causing extensive flooding of 
residential properties).  
Creating a full bypass is not usually easy as the flow has to pass under the obstruction 
that was the reason for the original culvert. 
The simplest approach to creating a full bypass is to allow flow to overtop the road or 
other obstruction that the culvert passes under. This means the water level has to rise, 
which means the banks of the channel need to be raised for some distance upstream 
of the culvert to ensure the water remains in bank. In some circumstances, overtopping 
is not acceptable (such as with a railway or motorway culvert). 
A screen bypass is often the preferred arrangement. The most common arrangement is 
to have separate side channels into which water can flow when the screen blocks. 
These channels return the flow to the channel between the screen and the entrance to 
the culvert. 
Figure 12.1 shows the example of a screen and bypass facility at Kydbrook. This is a 
simple but effective ‘belt and braces’ arrangement that minimises the probability of 
flood damage occurring while keeping trash and children out of the culvert.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 86 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
77 
The facility has the following key features: 
• there are bypass channels on both sides (under the concrete slabs); 
• the bypass entrances are also screened (otherwise the screen function 
would be compromised, whether a security screen or a trash screen); 
• the weir allowing flow into the bypass has a low level and a high level 
component; 
• there is a water-level recorder linked to telemetry to warn of high water 
level; 
• the water level coming out of bank would not cause flooding because there 
are low flood walls set back from the channel (not visible in the 
photograph). This allows the horizontal area of the main screen to convey 
flow when the inclined section is blocked; 
• the whole arrangement is fenced to discourage unauthorised access;  
• the horizontal portion of the screen is not safe for use as a working platform 
for cleaning the screen. 
 
Figure 12.1 Kydbrook screen and bypass facility, Ravensbourne, South London.  
12.3 
Hazards associated with bypasses 
The main hazard associated with a bypass facility is that the bypass itself will become 
blocked by trash.  
If the main screen is provided for security reasons, it is not acceptable to have a wider 
bar spacing on the bypass. If security is not an issue, adopting a wider bar spacing on 
the bypass screen may be acceptable.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 87 ===
 
78  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
The designer needs to take account of the type of trash and debris in the stream, and 
assess the probability of larger items bypassing the main stream and causing a 
problem in the culvert itself. 
Key guidance 38: Bypass hazards 
The main hazard associated with a bypass facility is that the bypass itself will 
become blocked by trash. 
12.4 
Bank raising 
Section 12.2 stated the simple solution of raising the level of channel banks upstream 
of the culvert such that, even if the screen (or the culvert itself) was totally blocked, 
water could flow over the road (or other obstruction) without coming out of bank. 
The disadvantages of this option are: 
• nuisance of water flowing over the road;  
• elevation of flood water level for some distance upstream of the culvert.  
If the culvert passes under a minor road and the watercourse is quite steep, the option 
of bank raising is likely to be acceptable. It is not acceptable if the culvert passes under 
infrastructure that itself would be damaged by water flowing over it (such as an 
industrial area) unless a suitable overtopping flow route can be found. 
12.5 
Overtopping flood flow route 
Consider the following example. A legal claim for compensation was made when a 
leisure complex was flooded. The complex had been built over a small stream (as an 
extension to an existing building on the side of a shallow valley). The culvert that 
conveyed the stream under the extension was provided with a poorly designed security 
screen which was prone to blockage. No bypass was incorporated in the design.  
The result was water flowing through the leisure complex on two occasions, causing 
extensive damage. Had this problem been recognised at the time of the design of the 
extension, it would have been relatively easy to provide an open-channel flood bypass 
route to one side of the building. 
Key guidance 39: Overtopping 
If overtopping might occur when a screen becomes blocked and it is impracticable to 
put in place measures to avoid blockage of the screen, the provision of a safe 
overtopping flow route must be considered if the overtopping would otherwise result 
in damage to property and/or infrastructure. 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 88 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
79 
13 Other operation and 
maintenance issues 
It is a fundamental part of the planning and design process for a screen that the 
maintenance requirements are fully assessed and the design is based on realistic 
assumptions on the frequency and effectiveness of screen cleaning. 
It is also vital that the maintenance commitment is accepted by the owner or operator 
of the screen. In particular this relates to: 
• regular cleaning of the screen and the safe disposal of accumulated debris; 
• non-routine response in the event that the screen becomes blocked with 
trash in times of flood flow;  
• maintaining the screen in a safe working condition.  
The legal implications of not clearing a screen can be significant.  
The Environment Agency operates under permissive powers. However, where a trash 
screen has been cleaned regularly there is the possibility of introducing the ‘custom 
and practice’ of clearance, which may create liability.  This potential liability needs to be 
considered if the maintenance regime is changed, reduced or the trash screen is 
removed altogether.  
13.1 
Flood and coastal risk management systems 
We break all main river catchments down into flood and coastal risk management 
(FCRM) systems.  
A FCRM system consists of those assets that contribute, as a whole, to reducing the 
flood risk to a discrete location or maintaining the status quo (where appropriate). A 
FCRM system should focus on what it is protecting (properties and other assets) or 
reduction of the flood risk. This leads, for example, to separate FCRM systems being 
required for urban and rural areas.  
Target condition grades and inspection frequencies are given to the flood defence 
assets within an FCRM system. These are recorded and communicated between the 
Asset System Management (ASM) (owner/manager) and Operations Delivery 
(operators) teams through the performance specification (see Section 13.2). 
13.2 
Performance specification 
A performance specification is a document used by us and produced by the ASM team 
in consultation with Operations Delivery. It sets out the standards to be achieved rather 
than detailed methods to be followed. It is used by Operations Delivery as the basis on 
which to plan, programme and implement its operation and maintenance works.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 89 ===
 
80  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
A performance specification includes information such as: 
• details of the flood risk management assets within an FCRM system; 
• overall consequence of failure of the system; 
• current condition of the assets; 
• recommended frequency of visual inspections;  
• target condition of the assets. 
All trash screens maintained by us are regarded as flood defence assets and target 
condition grades are therefore set for them. These condition grades are based on the 
Condition Assessment Manual (Environment Agency 2006) and refer to the structural 
condition of the asset.  
We use standard forms of a consistent format and quality to produce performance 
specifications. 
13.2.1 
Asset condition inspection cycles 
Visual inspection frequencies are determined by the risk (probability × consequence) of 
flooding on each reach and are identified within the performance specification.  
Inspection frequencies range from six to 60 months, although it is possible to specify a 
more frequent inspection for particularly high risk assets within a reach provided there 
is sufficient justification. 
Conversely, for flood defence assets within a low risk reach (such as a farmer’s field) 
the first step should be to determine: 
• whether the asset is actually required;  
• whether it could be removed, thus saving time on inspections and 
maintenance costs.  
Based on their inspection frequencies, screens are also subject to: 
• operational inspections; 
• mechanical inspections; 
• Public Safety Risk Assessment (PSRA) inspections;  
• health and safety site hazard inspections. 
13.3 
Operational plans 
We produce operational plans for all assets to ensure: 
• they are managed consistently;  
• they meet required safety and efficiency targets. 
Other operators of sites with screens are advised to adopt a similar plan.  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 90 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
81 
The operational plan sets out: 
• site-specific issues;  
• practices that should and should not be adopted or carried out at the site.  
The operational plan should include the health and safety file for the site, explaining 
how the required maintenance is to be carried out safely. It also identifies all hazards 
associated with completing any of the tasks at the site. 
Contractors employed to operate and maintain screens must be provided with the 
relevant manuals and other data pertaining to their safe operation. The screen owner 
will need to ensure, as far as is reasonably practical, that the contractor is competent to 
undertake the works.  
A manual handling risk assessment should be undertaken at the design stage to 
minimise, as far as is reasonably practical, the risk of injury to operatives from the 
physical operation of the screen during the clearing operation. 
For existing screens where there is no operational plan, it is recommended that one is 
developed by the Asset Manager to provide guidance to operatives on safe and 
efficient methods of screen clearance. Procedures should allow for updates and 
amendments as necessary where practices change. 
Key guidance 40: Operational plans 
Every Environment Agency-maintained screen should have an operational plan that: 
• sets out the inspection and cleaning frequency;  
• describes emergency response procedures.  
This is recommended as good practice and should be adopted by other operating 
authorities. 
 
Key guidance 41: Maintenance 
All screens have to be cleaned at intervals and may require a rapid response in a 
high flow event. Establishing the extent and cost of this maintenance liability, and 
securing a commitment to it from the responsible party, are essential components of 
the planning and design process. 
13.3.1 
Non-event (routine) clearance 
Installation of a screen will result in the build-up of debris over time. The rate of 
removal of this debris will be dictated by the rate at which debris accumulates on the 
screen.  
A safe and acceptable system of clearance should be developed to deal with the 
expected debris. This system should be developed and/or refined over time to ensure 
the screen does not impede flow during normal operating conditions or become a 
hazard in itself.  
We justify and record the details of the clearance frequency in the operational plan. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 91 ===
 
82  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
13.3.2 
Event (non-routine) clearance 
There will be instances (during flood flow events) when routine clearance will be unable 
to cope with the amount of debris collected on the screen. These events are unplanned 
and need to be dealt with on a reactive basis.  
Maintenance and operations procedures need to be clear on the steps to be taken to 
clear the screen in such an event, to ensure operatives are not placed at risk. 
13.3.3 
Mobilisation systems 
To clear debris during a non-routine event, it is necessary to set up a system that 
enables operatives to be instructed to attend and clear the screen within the time 
needed to prevent flood defences being overwhelmed.  
Key guidance 42: Emergency response 
Screens can block in a matter of hours or less in times of high flow. This is 
particularly true when high flows follow a prolonged dry spell, when accumulations of 
debris in the channel can be picked up by the rising water levels (‘first flush’ effect).  
The practicality of mobilising a maintenance team in a short time period to deal with 
the consequential screen blockage is a major factor during the design process. 
13.4 
Temporary storage of debris 
During non-event (routine) and event (non-routine) maintenance, it will be necessary to 
store the debris on-site before it can be disposed of.  
Procedures must ensure there is no risk to operatives when moving debris and the 
location of the temporary storage should allow easy transfer from screen to storage.  
The capacity of the storage area may be limited by space availability.  
Removal of debris at regular intervals is essential and the operational plan will state 
how long debris should be stored at the screen site. 
13.5 
Removal/disposal of debris 
All debris must be disposed of at a licensed waste disposal site. The designer should 
check the availability of sites locally and specify the nearest suitable site.  We (as 
owner/manager) will include this information in the operational plan. 
13.6 
Watercourse maintenance 
Upstream maintenance of a watercourse can impact on the screen downstream. The 
screen design must therefore take into account the watercourse maintenance regime.  
In particular, it should consider whether vegetation clearance could result in material 
flowing downstream to the screen – either at the time of clearance or subsequently (if 
cut material is left on the channel banks). 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 92 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
83 
13.7 
Record of operation and maintenance 
Operatives attending the site must make regular and detailed records of: 
• inspections carried out; 
• requirement for cleaning;  
• types and amounts of debris removed.  
They should use a site visit log to record this information. This can be used as 
evidence to justify future work and in the assessment of existing screens. 
Key guidance 43: Monitoring and recording 
Owners and operators of screens are urged to collect and record data on the 
operation of their screens. In particular: 
• frequency of cleaning;  
• quantities and types of debris removed;  
• details of problems experienced. 
This will facilitate future improvements to the screen and/or its future maintenance. 
 
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 93 ===
 
84  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
14 Summary of trash and 
security screens – Key 
guidance 
The following are the items of key guidance highlighted throughout the guide: 
 
Title 
Guidance 
1 
Use of 
screens 
We discourage the use of any form of screen except in circumstances where the 
benefits are significant and outweigh the risks. 
2 
Objective of a 
trash screen 
The aim of a trash screen should not be to trap as much debris as possible. In fact, 
the screen should trap as little debris as possible commensurate with achieving the 
aim of preventing material that could cause a blockage from progressing downstream. 
3 
Objective of a 
security 
screen 
The aim of a security screen is to prevent unauthorised access to the pipe or culvert. 
4 
Policy 
The guidance contained in this document is generally in accordance with the 
Environment Agency’s draft policy regarding screens. Nothing in this guidance 
supersedes or overrides the stated policy of the Environment Agency. 
5 
Options 
It should not be assumed that a screen is the right answer to a particular problem. 
In any given situation, a screen is only one of the options available to remove or 
reduce the perceived risk. A decision to provide a screen at any location must be 
based on a full appreciation of the risks and benefits. It is essential that all practical 
alternatives are investigated and eliminated before reaching the decision to provide a 
screen. 
6 
Justification 
The decision to install a screen must be fully justified. 
7 
Risk 
assessment 
Assessment of all the risks, taking into account probability and consequence, is an 
essential part of the appraisal process. This process must include the risks associated 
with installing a screen, as well the perceived risks that have led to the investigation 
into the need for a screen. 
8 
Flooding risk 
All screens, regardless of their primary purpose, will collect debris. This will obstruct 
flow, causing the upstream water level to rise, and will increase the probability of 
flooding. This is a key factor where the flooding would lead to significant damage to 
property and/or infrastructure. 
9 
Operational 
risks 
It is a fundamental part of the planning and design process for a screen that the 
maintenance requirements are fully assessed and accepted by the owner or operator 
of the screen. In particular this relates to: 
• 
regular cleaning of the screen and safe disposal of accumulated debris; 
• 
emergency response in the event that the screen becomes blocked 
with debris during a flood event. 
Failure to address these key issues has, in the past, led to serious flooding and 
subsequent legal action.  
Even when all possible steps are taken to ensure that the course of action adopted is 
based on sound reasoning and good data, and with the consent of all interested 
parties, it is essential that responsibility is defined, accepted and recorded in an 
operational plan. 
10 Risk of 
blockage 
(trash 
screens) 
Before deciding that a trash screen is necessary, it is essential to assess the 
probability of blockage of the culvert. This is a two-part process involving: 
• 
consideration of the nature of the debris load and its source;  
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 94 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
85 
 
Title 
Guidance 
• the likelihood of this material accumulating in the culvert. 
11 Decision 
rules 
(blockage 
and damage) 
For either of the risk factors (blockage or damage) a score of 15 and above indicates 
that a screen is required. 
Those scoring between seven and 14 should be investigated further and, where there 
is uncertainty in the significance of the consequence score, the Area Flood Risk 
Manager should be consulted.   
For scores of six and below, it is unlikely that a screen is required. 
Further clarification on the inclusion of remote water-level monitoring and CCTV 
monitoring are set out in Section 4.7. 
12 Risk of 
blockage 
(security 
screens) 
If a screen is proposed for security reasons it also needs to be assessed for the flood 
risk associated with its potential blockage following the methods set out in this guide. 
13 Decision 
rules (safety) 
Any hazard risk score above 20 out of maximum 25 will require the provision of a 
security screen. 
Further detailed consideration should be given to the provision of a security screen at 
those sites that score 15 or more. 
14 Screens on 
the culvert 
outlet 
No screen should be provided at the outlet of a culvert unless there is a security 
screen at the inlet as this could lead to the accidental death of anyone entering the 
culvert.  
A screen only at the outlet would also collect debris that would be difficult to remove.  
Where this situation can not be avoided, a hinged screen must be considered and 
secured by ’fail safe’ fixings to enable emergency opening of the screen. 
15 Need for 
monitoring 
Owners and operators of existing screens and designers of new screens must 
consider the use of remote water level monitoring and CCTV as an aid to: 
• 
understanding the way in which the screen performs;  
• determining the operational response at times of high flows when the 
risk of blockage is at its greatest. 
16 Decision 
rules 
(monitoring) 
Any proposed screen site with a consequence score of five, for blockage or damage 
(see Table 4.4), must have remote water-level monitoring linked by telemetry to an 
operational centre, and should have CCTV as an integral part of the scheme. 
Any proposed screen site with a consequence score of four, for blockage or damage 
(see Table 4.4), must have remote water-level monitoring installed, linked by 
telemetry to an operational centre as an integral part of the scheme. In this scenario 
the installation of CCTV should be considered.  
At all other sites, remote water-level monitoring must be considered as part of the 
design risk assessment. It can only be omitted where the risk can be acceptably 
mitigated or the consequence is negligible. 
17 Assessment 
of existing 
screens 
Existing screen sites should be subject to the same level of review as for the 
justification of the requirement for a new screen at a site. 
Existing screens should also be reviewed with the same vigour as new screens when 
considering the need for asset maintenance and ongoing operational requirements. 
18 Effective 
design 
To produce an effective design, it is essential to appreciate: 
• 
factors that influence the type and amount of debris; 
• 
hydraulic performance of the channel;  
• accessibility and maintainability of the screen. 
19 Stakeholder 
The first step in addressing a problem caused by the actions of the local community is 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 95 ===
 
86  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
Title 
Guidance 
engagement 
to engage with locals to explore how the problem can be reduced or eliminated.  
No trash screen should be promoted until the alternative of addressing the problem at 
source has been fully explored. 
20 Screen area 
To be eligible for inclusion in the effective screen area, an element of the screen: 
i. 
must be below the maximum allowable water level;  
ii. 
must not be a working platform designed for use by operatives;  
iii. 
must not include those parts of the screen obstructed by the supporting 
structure for the screen. 
21 Screen size 
The design screen area should be determined by using the evidence-based method 
detailed in the guide, checking that the resulting area is between three and 30 times 
the minimum cross-sectional area of the culvert being protected.  
If the calculated area is greater than 30 times the minimum culvert area, a design 
screen area of 30 times the minimum culvert area may be used provided there are no 
unusual aspects to the upstream catchment which would generate exceptional 
amounts of debris entering the watercourse. 
22 Significant 
events 
A significant event is an event that has sufficient flow to lift debris off the bed and 
banks of the watercourse.  
Unless there is justification based on hydrological data/records, the number of 
significant events should be taken as three. 
23 Bar spacing 
(general) 
The spacing between the bars of a screen should be the widest commensurate with 
achieving the objective(s). It is counterproductive to have a screen that traps debris 
which would otherwise pass harmlessly through the culvert. The chosen spacing must 
be checked to ensure that it does not conflict with any requirements for the passage 
of fish or wildlife. 
24 Bar spacing 
(security 
screens) 
Security screens should be designed to have a clear space of 140 mm between bars. 
The hydraulic impact of the bar spacing must be reviewed and investigated fully. 
25 Bar spacing 
(trash 
screens) 
Trash screens placed upstream of culverts and inverted siphons should have a 
minimum clear spacing of 150 mm between bars. The spacing should prevent the 
passage of material of the type and size likely to pose a significant risk at the site. 
In urban locations where larger debris needs to be excluded but smaller debris should 
be allowed to pass, a clear spacing of 300 mm between bars may be appropriate. 
26 Bar spacing 
(weed 
screens) 
Trash screens (or weed screens) placed at the intake to land drainage pumping 
stations can be designed with a clear spacing of around 75 mm between bars, 
provided regular cleaning is carried out manually or by an automatic raking system. 
27 Environment 
Designers must have regard to the environment and seek to reduce the impact of the 
screen while also seeking opportunities for environmental gain. However, the primary 
purpose of the screen must not be compromised. 
28 Hydraulic 
analysis 
Depending on the complexity of the site and availability of data, various levels of 
hydraulic analysis can be carried out.  
In many cases manual hydraulic analysis may be sufficient. If the analysis is complex, 
data is available and modelling can be carried out relatively easily, hydraulic 
modelling may be the preferred approach. 
29 Hydraulic 
modelling 
When using computational hydraulic models, it is essential that the designer 
understands the calculation process in the model and ensures the design is 
represented correctly.  
It is the responsibility of the designer to ensure the hydraulic model is capable of 
modelling the proposed design for all flow and blockage scenarios. 
30 Refinement 
of screen 
The results of the hydraulic analysis should be used to refine the design of the screen 
and the associated engineering works. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 96 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
87 
 
Title 
Guidance 
design 
It should also help to improve the hydraulic performance of the screen and culvert and 
inform the management of safety hazards. 
31 Screen 
cleaning 
arrangements 
Arrangements for cleaning the screen must be appropriate to the nature and quantity 
of the debris anticipated at the site. 
It should be possible for operatives to safely rake a screen under routine and most 
non-routine conditions. If a screen is drowned it may not be safe to clear, however the 
design should afford operatives early and safe access to the screen once water levels 
subside. 
Each method for screen cleaning should be evaluated separately and the design 
should minimise manual clearing and provide suitable safety arrangements. 
32 Rake reach 
and prong 
length 
Maximum rake length is two metres, with 1.5 m being the preferred length. 
A maximum prong length of 150 mm is suggested. Rake heads wider than about 450 
mm are usually impractical. 
33 Screen bars 
Bar dimensions should not be less than 8 x 75 mm for flat bars. 
Maximum unsupported length of a bar should not exceed 1.5 m. Recessed bracing 
should be provided if bar length exceeds 1.5 m. 
34 Fabrication 
and materials 
The materials from which a screen and its associated platforms and support structure 
are made should be robust and durable. This is important because the screen often 
has to perform in a challenging environment (e.g. corrosion, vandalism, debris loads, 
cleaning process).  
Galvanized steel has been shown over a long time to meet these requirements. 
Designers wishing to adopt alternative materials must be confident of their ability to 
remain serviceable for a significant period (e.g. 30 years). 
35 Health & 
safety 
It can help operatives if the screens for which they are responsible have common 
features (e.g. the design of anchorages for safety harnesses). However, health and 
safety issues cannot be addressed with ‘standard’ designs.  
Health and safety provisions must be bespoke, that is, they should be designed for 
the screen in question and its particular operational requirements, making use of 
standard equipment where appropriate. 
36 Lighting 
provision 
Under no circumstances should operatives be permitted to work on the screen in 
darkness. 
37 Screen 
bypass 
The need for a screen bypass can often be avoided by adopting a sound design for 
the screen and ensuring a proactive maintenance regime so that the likelihood of 
blockage is reduced to an acceptable level. 
38 Bypass 
hazards 
The main hazard associated with a bypass facility is that the bypass itself will become 
blocked by trash. 
39 Overtopping 
If overtopping might occur when a screen becomes blocked and it is impracticable to 
put in place measures to avoid blockage of the screen, the provision of a safe 
overtopping flow route must be considered if the overtopping would otherwise result in 
damage to property and/or infrastructure. 
40 Operational 
plans 
Every Environment Agency maintained screen should have an operational plan that: 
• 
sets out the inspection and cleaning frequency;  
• 
describes emergency response procedures.  
This is recommended as good practice and should be adopted by other operating 
authorities. 
41 Maintenance 
All screens have to be cleaned at intervals and may require a rapid response in a high 
flow event. Establishing the extent and cost of this maintenance liability, and securing 
a commitment to it from the responsible party, are essential components of the 
planning and design process. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 97 ===
 
88  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
 
Title 
Guidance 
42 Emergency 
response 
Screens can block in a matter of hours or less in times of high flow. This is particularly 
true when high flows follow a prolonged dry spell, when accumulations of debris in the 
channel can be picked up by the rising water levels (‘first flush’ effect).  
The practicality of mobilising a maintenance team in a short time period to deal with 
the consequential screen blockage is a major factor during the design process. 
43 Monitoring 
and recording 
Owners and operators of screens are urged to collect and record data on the 
operation of their screens. In particular: 
• 
frequency of cleaning;  
• 
quantities and types of debris removed;  
• 
details of problems experienced. 
This will facilitate future improvements to the screen and/or its future maintenance. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 98 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
89 
References 
BRITISH STANDARDS INSTITUTION (BSI), 2006. BS 1722:2006 Fences. London: 
BSI.  
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY RESEARCH AND INFORMATION ASSOCIATION 
(CIRIA), 1997. Culvert Design Guide. Report 168. London: CIRIA [Due to be updated in 
2009]. 
ENVIRONMENT AGENCY, 1999. Policy Regarding Culverts. Bristol: Environment 
Agency. 
ENVIRONMENT AGENCY, 2002. Trash Screens: Design and Operation Manual. R&D 
Project W5A-01. Bristol: Environment Agency. 
ENVIRONMENT AGENCY, 2006. Condition Assessment Manual. Document 
Reference 166_03_SD01. Controlled copy. 
FEDERAL HIGHWAYS ADMINISTRATION (FHWA), 1985. Hydraulic Design of 
Highway Culverts, Hydraulic Design Series No.5, Report No. FHWA-IP-85-15. 
Washington DC: Department of Transportation, Federal Highways Administration. 
DEFRA AND ENVIRONMENT AGENCY, 2004. Afflux at Bridges and Culverts: Review 
of current knowledge and practice, Report No. W5A-061/TR1. Bristol: Environment 
Agency. 
DEFRA, 2006. Flood and Coastal Defence Appraisal Guidance (FCDPAG3) Economic 
Appraisal. Supplementary Note to Operating Authorities – Climate Change Impacts. 
London: Defra. Available from: 
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environ/fcd/pubs/pagn/climatechangeupdate.pdf [Accessed 7 
July 2009]. 
HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE, 2007. Construction (Design & Management) 
Regulations 2007 (CDM 2007). Norwich: The Stationery Office. 
HR WALLINGFORD AND JBA, 2009. CES/AES Project website and online user guide. 
Wallingford, Oxfordshire. Available from: http://www.river-conveyance.net [Accessed 7 
July 2009]. 
INSTITUTE OF HYDROLOGY, 1999. Flood Estimation Handbook – Volumes 1-5. 
Wallingford: Institute of Hydrology (now CEH Wallingford). 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE FISHERIES AND FOOD (MAFF), 2001. Flood and 
Coastal Defence Project Appraisal Guidance, Overview (including general guidance), 
FCDPAG1. London: MAFF. Available from: 
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environ/fcd/pubs/pagn/fcdpag1.pdf [Accessed 7 July 2009]. 
NATIONAL RIVERS AUTHORITY (NRA), 1993 Interim Guidance Notes for the Design 
and Operation of Trash Screens, P-126. Revised 1995. London: National Rivers 
Authority. 
ROYAL SOCIETY FOR THE PREVENTION OF ACCIDENTS (RoSPA), 2004. Online 
information on statistics associated with drowning. National Water Safety Forum. 
Available from: http://www.nationalwatersafety.org.uk/inlandwatersafety/facts.htm 
[Accessed 7 July 2009]. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 99 ===
 
90  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
List of abbreviations 
AES 
Afflux Estimation System 
Bdf 
Blinded depth factor 
CCTV 
Closed circuit television 
CDM 
Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 
Da 
Debris amount 
Defra 
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs  
Dda 
Design debris amount 
Dr 
Domestic refuse 
FRM 
Flood Risk Management 
Lhr 
Large household refuse 
Lndr 
Large non-domestic refuse 
Lv 
Large vegetation 
MEICA 
Mechanical, Electrical, Instrumentation, Control and Automation 
NEAS 
National Environmental Assessment Service 
NFCDD 
National Flood and Coastal Defence Database 
PAMS 
Performance-based Asset Management System 
PSRA 
Public Safety Risk Assessment  
SAMP 
System Asset Management Plan 
Sv 
Small vegetation 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 100 ===
 
 
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
91 
Glossary 
Bank full 
A situation where the water level in the watercourse equates to 
the top of the river bank, at the level just before overtopping 
occurs. 
Bracing 
Additional strengthening provided for long screen bars that might 
otherwise be bent in use or as a result of vandalism. Bracing 
should be recessed so that it does not interfere with movement 
of cleaning rake. 
CCTV 
Closed circuit television. 
Conveyance and 
Afflux Estimation 
Systems 
(CES/AES) 
UK operating authorities have supported the development of the 
Conveyance Estimation System (CES) to estimate channel flow 
capacity (conveyance) and in particular flood water levels and 
the Afflux Estimation System (AES) for estimating the local water 
surface profiles and head loss associated with bridge and culvert 
structures (see http://www.river-conveyance.net). 
Culvert 
An enclosed section of a watercourse. 
Debris 
Solid material transported within a watercourse particularly 
during flood events. Debris can move intermittently and has 
potential to cause blockages that impede the free flow of water. 
Flashy 
A watercourse or catchment with water levels that rise and fall 
rapidly in response to rainfall. 
Freeboard 
The safety margin between the design flood level and the top of 
a flood bank or wall. Freeboard generally includes allowances for 
inaccuracy in flood level estimation, settlement of a flood 
defence and construction tolerance. 
Gantry 
Part of the installation that carries a mechanical grab device over 
the screen bars. 
Hazard 
A physical event, phenomenon or human activity with the 
potential to result in harm. A hazard does not necessarily lead to 
harm.  In the context of this guide, harm is primarily death or 
injury to operatives or members of the public, or flood damage to 
property or infrastructure. 
Main river 
Usually larger streams and rivers, but the term also includes 
smaller watercourses of strategic drainage importance. A main 
river is defined as a watercourse shown as such on a main river 
map, and can include any structure or appliance for controlling or 
regulating the flow of water in, into or out of the main river. Main 
rivers are designated by Defra in England and by the Welsh 
Assembly Government in Wales. 
Non-routine event 
An event that requires operatives to attend the site to clear a 
screen on an unplanned basis and not as part of their regular 
maintenance routine. Such events are often a result of adverse 
weather conditions and a high flow event. 
Operational plan 
A document aiming to improve quality and consistency of 
management of major operating assets. There is a close link 
between Operational Plans and major asset management plans 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 101 ===
 
92  
Trash and Security Screen Guide 2009 
to ensure assets are managed consistently and meet the 
required safety and efficiency targets. 
Performance 
specification 
A series of documents setting out the standards agreed by Area 
Asset System Management teams for each Flood and Coastal 
Risk Management (FCRM) system. It enables resources and 
investment to be targeted according to flood risk. 
Platform (also 
described as 
raking platform 
and working 
platform) 
A horizontal part of a screen provided to allow operatives to 
stand safely when cleaning a screen. Such platforms require 
either solid or open-tread flooring, and cannot contribute to the 
screen area in terms of conveying flow. 
Probability 
The likelihood that an event will happen (expressed variously, for 
example, one in 100 years, one per cent in any year, 100 to one 
against in any year). 
Risk 
A combination of the probability of occurrence of a defined 
hazard and the magnitude of the consequences of the 
occurrence (risk = probability x consequence). 
Screen bar 
That part of the installation superstructure that collects the debris 
transported down the watercourse. The spacing of the bars is a 
critical design element. Spacing can be defined as clear spacing 
or centre to centre. 
Screen rake 
A custom-made device used by maintenance teams to remove 
trash and debris from the screen. Rakes are not capable of 
removing large or heavy items. 
Security screen 
Any screen of which the primary purpose is to prevent 
unauthorised or accidental access to an enclosed section of 
watercourse. 
Significant event 
An event that has sufficient flow to lift debris off the bed and 
banks of the watercourse which otherwise would have stayed in 
situ during normal flows. 
Siphon (or 
Syphon) 
More correctly referred to as an inverted siphon. It is a particular 
form of culvert in which the conduit drops down to pass under an 
obstruction and then rises up at the other side, such that the 
centre part of the conduit is always full of water. 
Telemetry 
Use of telephone or radio transmission to convey data from a 
remote site to an operational centre. 
Tines  
Fingers of a grab device designed to pick up debris from the 
screen bars. 
Trash 
For the purposes of this guide the terms “trash” and “debris” are 
synonymous. 
Trash screen 
Any screen of which the primary purpose is to prevent trash and 
debris from entering an enclosed section of watercourse. 
Watercourse 
Any river, stream, brook, beck or drain that acts to convey 
rainfall run-off and/or groundwater flow. 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020

=== página 102 ===
 
This publication was withdrawn in May 2020
