=== página 1 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-
- -
-
-
Stormwater Best Management Practice 
Stormwater Inlet Controls 
Minimum Measure: Post Construction Stormwater Management in New Development and 
Redevelopment 
Subcategory: Other 
Description 
Stormwater inlets—also known as storm drain inlets, 
curb inlets or catch basins—are inlets to storm drain 
systems. Communities can use a range of stormwater 
controls for these inlets: products that capture floatable 
and settleable pollutants such as oil, grease, trash and 
coarse sediments at the inflow. These controls are 
typically pretreatment devices, removing pollutants that 
would pose clogging or maintenance problems for 
downstream stormwater controls. 
There are two common types of stormwater inlet 
controls: 
• 
Catch basin inserts. A catch basin insert
accumulates sediment and debris and provides an
easy means of regular collection and disposal.
Some inserts drop directly into existing catch basins,
while others may call for retrofit construction. They
can be a low-cost alternative to more costly ways to
clean catch basins and sewers, such as vacuum
pumping.
• 
Hydrodynamic separators. A hydrodynamic
separator, or swirl separator, is a modified traditional
oil-grit separator. It contains a cylindrical chamber
with an internal component that creates a swirling
motion as stormwater flows through it, which
separates the sediment from the stormwater. It may
also have other compartments or chambers to trap
oil and other floatables. There are several types of
proprietary separators, with slightly different designs.
Applicability 
Stormwater inlet controls work best in highly impervious 
sites where trash, sediment or other coarse pollutants 
regularly overload existing stormwater inlets. They 
perform variably and are not effective at removing 
nutrients and bacteria. This means they are best, not on 
their own, but as pretreatment for other downstream 
stormwater controls. Catch basin inserts may be more 
suitable when available land is limited, such as in 
urbanized areas. Swirl separators tend to need more 
space than catch basin inserts but can still function when 
space is limited. 
The typical design of a catch basin insert is a set of filters 
that are specifically chosen to address the pollutants 
expected at that site. 
Credit: King County, 2016 
Limitations 
Stormwater inlet controls have two major limitations: 
• 
They have variable and limited effectiveness at
removing fine, soluble pollutants such as nutrients,
metals and bacteria.
• 
They need maintenance at set intervals. Most of
them are small and designed for concentrated flow
from small, highly impervious sites. Sediment, debris
and trash can therefore accumulate rapidly in them,
causing them to become a source of pollutants if not
properly maintained.
Siting and Design Considerations 
Designers should always refer to manufacturer 
specifications for stormwater inlet control siting, design 
and installation details. Several design options are 
available for catch basin inserts: 
• 
One option consists of a series of trays, where the
top tray is an initial sediment trap and the underlying
trays are media filters.
• 
A second option uses filter fabric to remove
pollutants from stormwater.
https://www.epa.gov/npdes 
EPA-832-F-21-031Y 
December 2021 

=== página 2 ===
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
—
NPDES: Stormwater Best Management Practice—Stormwater Inlet Controls 
• 
Another option uses a plastic box that fits directly
into the catch basin as a filter; the box removes
petroleum products as stormwater passes through it
and captures trash and sediment.
In most cases, designers can incorporate hooded outlets 
to prevent floatable materials and trash from bypassing 
inserts. 
Designers should size inserts according to the catch 
basin size and the expected load of settleable solids and 
debris. (Even within an individual site, these factors can 
be highly variable.) In any case, inserts are very small 
compared to the volume of the catch basin sump. 
In sizing hydrodynamic separators, designers should 
consider the peak flow of a specific storm event. (In 
contrast, designers size most other stormwater controls 
based on the capture, storage or treatment of a specific 
volume.) Sizing based on peak flow rate uses less space 
to treat stormwater than other controls such as 
bioretention practices and ponds. 
Maintenance Considerations 
Stormwater inlet controls need regular monitoring and 
maintenance to prevent clogging; designers should 
consult manufacturer instructions for specifics. 
Maintenance logs are a helpful way to keep track of the 
rate of sediment accumulation. Some cities have even 
used GIS to track sediment collection and optimize 
maintenance schedules. 
Catch basin insert maintenance includes removing 
sediment, trash and other debris and may include 
replacing filter media, if applicable. Maintenance staff 
can remove sediment and debris from the catch basin 
insert by removing and manually emptying the insert or 
by using a vacuum truck. 
For hydrodynamic separators, maintenance staff also 
use vacuum trucks to remove sediment and debris. 
In some regions, it may be difficult to find 
environmentally acceptable ways to dispose of sediment 
from stormwater inlet controls. Hazardous waste, 
pretreatment or groundwater regulations may bar this 
sediment from landfills, land application and sanitary 
sewer systems. If so, responsible parties should dispose 
of it at a landfill approved to accept it. 
Effectiveness 
Overall effectiveness varies considerably and depends 
on control type as well as site-specific conditions, such 
as the amount of sediment that reaches the inlet, the 
presence of organic debris (e.g., leaf litter), street 
sweeping programs, and the frequency of maintenance. 
Although stormwater inlet controls do not remove 
smaller or more soluble constituents as effectively as 
other stormwater controls (e.g., stormwater wetlands or 
bioretention practices), they may partially filter 
suspended solids, nutrients and metals along with the 
coarse sediment and debris they remove. The 
International Stormwater BMP Database reviewed 
performance data from studies that looked at a number 
of manufactured devices, including catch basin inserts 
(11 studies) and manufactured devices that promote 
gravitational settling or hydrodynamic separation (22 
studies). The review found moderate removal rates for 
total suspended solids and phosphorus, but not 
significant removal of nitrogen. Removal of metals 
varied. Table 1 presents summary results. 
Table 1. Pollutant removal performance of stormwater inlet controls. 
Control Type 
Pollutant 
Influent Concentration 
(mg/L)a 
Effluent Concentration 
(mg/L) a 
Catch basin inserts 
Total suspended solids 
51.7 
32.9 
Total phosphorus 
0.20 
0.12 
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen 
1.80 
1.64 
Copper 
21.43 
14.20 
Lead 
5.00 
4.76 
Zinc 
124.6 
122.3 
Page 2 
Office of Water, 4203M 

=== página 3 ===
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
—
NPDES: Stormwater Best Management Practice—Stormwater Inlet Controls 
Control Type 
Pollutant 
Influent Concentration 
(mg/L)a 
Effluent Concentration 
(mg/L) a 
Hydrodynamic 
separators 
Total suspended solids 
33.6 
29.7 
Total phosphorus 
0.35 
0.22 
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen 
1.74 
1.63 
Copper 
12.41 
11.35 
Lead 
7.56 
5.84 
Zinc 
75.2 
57.6 
Source: Median concentrations from Leisenring et al., 2012 
a Copper, lead and zinc concentrations are in μg/L. 
Cost Considerations1
Important costs for stormwater inlet controls include 
structure costs, installation costs, maintenance costs, 
and costs associated with sediment and debris disposal. 
• 
Structure. Catch basin inserts cost from $300 to
$10,000 per unit. Hydrodynamic separators range in
cost from $6,000 to $450,000 per unit, depending on
how much flow they can treat (SCVURPPP, 2007).
• 
Installation. A single catch basin insert costs roughly
$1,800 to install. A hydrodynamic separator takes
significant work to construct—and, correspondingly,
has a construction cost roughly double that of the
separator itself (SCVURPPP, 2007).
• 
Maintenance. The cost associated with stormwater
inlet control maintenance depends on the
maintenance method and labor costs. To remove
sediment and debris, maintenance staff typically use
vacuum trucks for hydrodynamic separators and
either vacuum trucks or manual removal for catch 
basin inserts. Using a vacuum truck requires less 
labor, but a small community might find it too 
expensive to buy one—though it might be able to 
share one with another community or hire a 
contractor with access to one. Cleanout of a 
hydrodynamic separator costs roughly $4,000 per 
structure (Kim, 2014). 
• 
Sediment and debris disposal. Depending on local
regulations, costs for disposing of the sediment
captured in hydrodynamic separators may be
significant—$65 per ton (Kim, 2014).
1 Prices updated to January 2019 dollars. Inflation rates 
obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics CPI Inflation 
Calculator (https://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/cpicalc.pl); reference 
dates used were January 2007 (for dollars from SCVURPPP, 
2007) and January 2014 (for dollars from Kim, 2014). 
Additional Information 
Additional information on related practices and the Phase II MS4 program can be found at 
EPA’s National Menu of Best Management Practices (BMPs) for Stormwater website 
References 
Kim, J. (2014). Maintenance guidance for stormwater hydrodynamic separators (Doctoral dissertation). Rutgers 
University, New Brunswick, NJ. 
Leisenring, M., Clary, J., & Hobson, P. (2012). International stormwater best management practices (BMP) database— 
Manufactured devices performance summary. Alexandria, VA: Water Environment & Reuse Foundation. 
Santa Clara Valley Urban Runoff Pollution Prevention Program (SCVURPPP). (2007). Trash BMP tool box. Sunnyvale, 
CA: Santa Clara Valley Urban Runoff Pollution Prevention Program. 
Disclaimer 
This fact sheet is intended to be used for informational purposes only. These examples and references are not intended to be 
comprehensive and do not preclude the use of other technically sound practices. State or local requirements may apply. 
Page 3 
Office of Water, 4203M 
