 
 CDS Hydrodynamic Separator for Stormwater Treatment 
 CAREERS 
 COMPANY 
 CONTACT US 
 IIJA Resources 
 DESIGN CENTER LOGIN 
 Design Center 
 REQUEST PRICING 
 Pipe 
 Corrugated Metal Pipe 
 HEL-COR 
 HEL-COR Deck Drain 
 ULTRA FLO 
 Slotted Drain 
 Smooth Cor 
 CORLIX 
 MOBILE PIPE 
 CMP Accessories 
 CHS – Culvert Headwall System 
 CMP End Sections 
 CMP Fittings 
 CMP Banding Systems 
 CMP Coatings 
 CMP Shapes and Uses 
 Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe 
 A-2000 
 TRUSS PIPE 
 Solid Wall Pipe 
 Steel Reinforced Polyethylene Pipe 
 DuroMaxx 
 Specialty Products 
 StormRax 
 Pipe Solutions Interactive Brochures 
 Bridges & Structures 
 Plate 
 BridgeCor 
 MULTI-PLATE 
 Aluminum Box Culvert 
 Aluminum Structural Plate 
 SUPER SPAN and SUPER PLATE 
 ULTRA-COR 
 Precast 
 CON SPAN O Series 
 CON SPAN i Series 
 EXPRESS Foundations 
 BEBO Bridge 
 CON SPAN B Series 
 Truss and Girders 
 Continental Pedestrian Bridge 
 Steadfast Vehicular Truss 
 Big R 
 Bridge Deck 
 ClearCast 
 ClearShield 
 Bridge Plank 
 Specialty Products 
 RED-E-DUCT Precast Duct Bank 
 Cattle Guards 
 Liner Plate 
 Metric Sheeting 
 Rail Collector Pans 
 Prestressed Concrete 
 Structure Solutions Interactive Brochures 
 Walls 
 Retaining Walls 
 Bin Wall 
 Anchor Wall 
 Vist-A-Wall Precast MSE Wall 
 Vist-A-Wall Wire Wall 
 Stormwater Management 
 Detention and Infiltration 
 CMP Detention And Infiltration 
 Xfiltration Joint 
 DuroMaxx SRPE Detention 
 ChamberMaxx Plastic Chambers 
 UrbanPond Concrete Detention 
 GO Big with Contech 
 Hydrodynamic Separation 
 CDS 
 Saturn Separator 
 Cascade Separator 
 DSBB – Debris Separating Baffle Box 
 Vortechs 
 Filtration 
 StormFilter 
 Jellyfish Filter 
 High Capacity Kraken Filter 
 Water Polisher 
 Biofiltration Solutions 
 Filterra Bioretention 
 Modular Wetlands Linear 
 Rapterra System 
 Maintenance Services 
 Other Stormwater 
 Rainwater Harvesting 
 Bio Clean Catch Basin Inlet Filters 
 Erosion Control 
 Hard Armor 
 Armorflex 
 Armorloc 
 A-Jacks 
 Geolink 
 Start a Project 
 Project Design Worksheets 
 Armortec 
 Filterra 
 Rapterra 
 Modular Wetlands Linear 
 Reline 
 Sanitary Sewer 
 Storm Sewer 
 Stormwater Detention 
 Stormwater Treatment 
 Tank 
 Knowledge Center 
 Case Studies 
 Bridge 
 Pipe 
 Stormwater 
 Erosion Control 
 Videos 
 Featured 
 Bridges 
 Pipe 
 Stormwater 
 Webinars 
 Bridges 
 Pipe 
 Stormwater 
 PDH Articles 
 Mastering the Design of CMP Detention and Infiltration Systems 
 Concrete Armor Units Advancing Scour Protection 
 Engineered Pipe Solutions for the Next Big Storm: Innovations in Storm Sewer Systems 
 From Pollutants to Practices: Designing Effective Stormwater Treatment Trains 
 Technical Presentations 
 Events 
 Learn 
 Newsletter 
 The Pipe Blog 
 The Stormwater Blog 
 Technical Documents 
 CAREERS 
 COMPANY 
 CONTACT US 
 IIJA Resources 
 Design Center 
 REQUEST PRICING 
 Design Center 
 REQUEST PRICING 
 Home 
 Stormwater Management 
 Hydrodynamic Separation 
 CDS 
 CDS® Hydrodynamic Separator
 The CDS hydrodynamic separator uses swirl concentration and continuous deflective separation to screen, separate and trap trash, debris, sediment, and hydrocarbons from stormwater runoff. CDS captures and retains 100% of floatables and neutrally buoyant debris 4.7 mm or larger, effectively removes sediment, and incorporates a non-blocking screen.
 Why Contech 
 Start a Project 
 Find Your Local Sales Contact
 Our local contacts are experts who are ready to help!
 Area of Interest 
 Select Bridge and Wall Solutions Stormwater Treatment and Detention/Retention Pipe and Drainage Solutions Sanitary Pipe Solutions Hard Armor Solutions Other 
 Your Zip Code 
 Get Connected 
 Close search results
 Description 
 Applications 
 Brochures 
 FAQs 
 Photos & Videos 
 The CDS Hydrodynamic Separator - Superior Stormwater Trash and Sediment Removal
 The CDS is a hydrodynamic separator that uses continuous deflective separation – a combination of swirl concentration and indirect screening to screen, separate and trap debris, sediment, and hydrocarbons from stormwater runoff. The indirect screening capability of the system allows for 100% removal of floatables and neutrally buoyant material debris 4.7mm or larger without binding. CDS retains all captured pollutants, even at high flow rates, and provides easy access for maintenance.
 CDS is used to meet trash Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) requirements, for stormwater quality control, inlet and outlet pollution control, and as pretreatment for filtration, detention/infiltration, bioretention, rainwater harvesting systems, and Low Impact Development designs.
 How the CDS Hydrodynamic Separator Treats Stormwater
 Stormwater enters the CDS through one or multiple inlets and/or a grate inlet. 
 The inlet flume guides the treatment flow into the separation chamber where water velocities within the chamber create a swirling vortex.
 Water velocities in the swirl chamber continually shear debris off the treatment screen.
 The combination of swirl concentration and indirect screening force floatables and solids to the center of the separation chamber trapping 100% of floatables and neutrally buoyant debris larger than the screen aperture.
 Sediment settles into an isolated sump while floatables and neutrally buoyant pollutants are captured in the separation cylinder. All pollutants remain in these sections of the unit until they are removed during maintenance.
 Stormwater then moves under the hydrocarbon baffle, and the treated water exits the system. The baffle acts as a wall for hydrocarbon containment. It contains previously captured hydrocarbons and prevents the agitation of hydrocarbons when high-flows spill over the diversion weir.
 During high-intensity events, the internal diversion weir directs a portion of flows greater than the design storm around the treatment chamber and over an internal bypass weir.
 Treated stormwater exits the CDS via the outlet pipe.
 CDS Hydrodynamic Separator Features and Benefits
 FEATURES 
 BENEFITS 
 Captures and retains 100% of floatables and neutrally buoyant debris 4.7mm or larger 
 Superior pollutant removal 
 Self-cleaning screen 
 Ease of maintenance 
 Isolated storage sump eliminates scour potential 
 Excellent pollutant retention 
 Internal bypass 
 Eliminates the need for additional structures 
 Multiple pipe inlets and 90-180º angles 
 Design flexibility 
 Numerous regulatory approvals 
 Proven performance 
 The Contech Design Center
 The Contech Design Center provides engineers unparalleled flexibility in the layout and configuration of a detention or infiltration storage system. Our latest release includes options previously unavailable in a free, web-based design tool:
 A 2D/3D design environment with high-resolution graphics, including BIM model output.
 The ability to import a PDF site plan and design a system to scale over the plan.
 Provide instant access to customized, project-specific drawings.
 Design multiple systems per project and save for future use.
 Digitally collaborate using the new “Project Collaboration” feature. Share your project easily with anyone through the new project management page.
Contech Design Center 
 Select CDS Certifications
 Washington Department of Ecology (GULD) - Pretreatment
 Canadian ISO 14034 Environmental Management – Environmental Technology Verified (ETV)
 California Statewide Trash Amendments Full Capture System Certified*
 *The CDS System has been certified by the California State Water Resources Control Board as a Full Capture System provided that it is sized to treat the peak flow rate from the region specific 1-year, 1-hour design storm, or the peak flow capacity of the corresponding storm drain, whichever is less.
 CDS Configurations
 Inline, offline, grate inlet, and drop inlet configurations available
 Internal and external peak bypass options are available
 CDS Maintenance 
 CDS provides unobstructed access to stored pollutants, making it easy to maintain.
 Maintaining a CDS is a simple process that can be easily accomplished using a vacuum truck, with no requirement to enter the unit.
 Contech has created a network of  Certified Maintenance Providers to provide maintenance on stormwater BMP’s.
 Pretreatment to Storage
 Our hydrodynamic separators are frequently installed upstream of detention and infiltration systems as pretreatment devices.  By capturing the majority of sediment, hydrocarbons and trash and debris upstream of the storage system, maintenance becomes much easier as material is congregated into a smaller device with clear access for cleanout.  Additionally, by utilizing pretreatment upstream of infiltration systems, sediment that would have clogged the stone voids in the storage envelope surrounding the storage chamber can be captured before entering the storage system thus extending the longevity of the entire system.
 Hydrodynamic Separation for Water Quality
 Our hydrodynamic separation products (including the CDS, Cascade Separator, SciCloneX, Vortechs, and Stormceptor Systems) are reliable, easy to install, and offer high-performance, proven, stormwater pollutant removal. The systems are widely accepted for effective solids removal and can be designed to achieve your site treatment goals - including TMDL requirements for TSS and trash.
 Trash Removal
 Keep trash and debris out of your lakes, streams and oceans by installing one of our technologies at the inlet or outlet of your drainage system.  Our systems - which include the CDS, Cascade Separator, SciCloneX, DSBB, Vortechs, and Stormceptor Systems are most effective on removing sediments, trash and debris, and oil and grease from storm water runoff.
 High Volume Applications
 Designing, manufacturing and installing high-volume stormwater detention and treatment systems requires expert engineering, planning, and logistical support to manage costs and keep the project on schedule and under budget. When you need a proven, large scale stormwater management system,   “Go Big” with Contech. 
 Pretreatment for Rainwater Harvesting
 Our hydrodynamic separation products are ideal solutions for preatreatment to rainwater harvesting.  Not only do they improve the overall water quality, they also provide protect the pumps and controls from being overburdened with material that could clog and damage the mechanical system. 
 CDS Solutions Brochure
 Hydrodynamic Separator Products Brochure
 CDS-vs-Traditional Configuration Flier
 Trash Collection Brochure
 CDS FAQs 
 Open 
 Close 
 All 
 What does CDS stand for? 
 CDS stands for Continuous Deflective Separation. It is a stormwater treatment technology that combines swirl concentration with indirect screening to separate and capture trash, debris, sediment, and hydrocarbons from stormwater runoff.
 What does it mean when a hydrodynamic separator system is placed "online"?  
       An online hydrodynamic separator is installed directly in the storm drain flow path. This allows flows larger than the treatment-design storm to pass through the unit, eliminating the need for a separate bypass structure. 
      For more information, please refer to this blog post  - Hydrodynamic Separation Devices: Online Vs. Offline   
 How do you manage vector control in a CDS ? 
 Vector control in Contech systems is managed through practical design measures that reduce mosquito access while maintaining inspection and maintenance access. Access prevention options include non-vented manhole covers, screened system vents, and mosquito inserts for existing manhole covers. Where standing water or debris may be stored, systems should include inspection and treatment access points. These measures help limit vector access while allowing owners and maintenance providers to inspect, clean, or treat areas of concern without confined-space entry whenever feasible.
 How do you know when a CDS system needs to be maintained? 
 CDS units should be visually inspected at least twice per year, with inspections commonly recommended after the spring and fall storm seasons. Cleaning is needed when sediment reaches 75% of the isolated sump capacity or when there is a noticeable accumulation of hydrocarbons, trash, or debris.
 Sediment levels can be checked with a calibrated dipstick, tape measure, or similar measuring device. For more information, please refer to the CDS Maintenance Manual.  
 When would I specify a CDS vs a Cascade Separator? 
 Specify CDS when the project requires field-based testing, full trash capture, or trash retention in addition to sediment removal.
 If the project is primarily focused on sediment, or TSS, a Cascade Separator may be a good fit depending on local regulations and approval requirements. Contact your local Contech Stormwater Consultant to confirm the best technology for your project.
 How do you size a CDS? 
 Proper sizing of a hydrodynamic separator, or HDS system, should begin with a review of applicable local and state stormwater regulations. In many cases, regulations will define the required sizing method and may also identify which products are approved for use.
 If there are no specific regulatory requirements, the engineer should first identify the target pollutants, such as trash, sediment, or hydrocarbons, and the required removal performance.
 HDS systems are commonly sized using one of two methods: the Point on a Curve method or the Net Annual method. For more detailed information, please refer to our blog posts on these sizing approaches.
 Common Sizing Methodologies for Hydrodynamic Separators Part 1: Point on a Curve 
 Common Sizing Methodologies for Hydrodynamic Separators Part 2: Net Annual Sizing 
 What inlet and outlet pipe sizes can the CDS accommodate? 
 CDS inlet and outlet pipe sizes vary by unit model, pipe material, and site-specific requirements. Your local Contech Stormwater Consultant can help review the project conditions and confirm the appropriate configuration
 How much hydraulic drop is required through the CDS? 
 CDS units do not require a physical drop from inlet to outlet. In many applications, the inlet and outlet pipes can be set at the same invert elevation.
 Hydraulic grade line impacts can vary based on the unit model, flow rate, pipe configuration, and site conditions, so project-specific hydraulic data should be reviewed during design.
 Can the CDS be used in tailwater conditions? 
 Yes, CDS units may be used in tailwater conditions, depending on the tailwater elevation, required treatment rate, hydraulic grade line, and overall site conditions.
 Because these factors are project-specific, contact your local Contech Stormwater Consultant to confirm whether CDS is appropriate for your application.
 Is the CDS9290-12-F available with both 2,400-micron and 4,700-micron screen sizes? 
 No. The CDS 92 series is only available with a 4,700-micron screen aperture.
 When should I specify CDS vs. Vortechs 
 Determining where to use a CDS vs a Vortechs is dependent on local regulatory requirements, site conditions, and treatment and bypass flow rates that can impact the size and type of HDS unit.  
 CDS is typically the ideal solution for removing and retaining sediment (TSS), trash and debris, and hydrocarbons making it a natural starting point for most preliminary site designs.  
 Vortechs offers many of the same benefits as CDS within a shallower and wider footprint.  That shallow footprint makes vortechs a great fit for sites where you may not be able to put a deeper manhole like a CDS.  
 How much head loss occurs through a HDS unit? 
 Head loss through an HDS unit varies by unit type, model size, flow rate, inlet/outlet configuration, and tailwater conditions. There is not one standard value that applies to all hydrodynamic separators. Contech can provide project-specific sizing and hydraulic information to help determine the expected head loss for the selected unit. Please reach out to your Contech Stormwater Consultant for more information. 
 Show All FAQs 
 CDS Gallery
 Load More 
 CONTECH DESIGN CENTER
 Design Help 
 Technical Documents
 Case Studies
 Explore the case studies library 
 POPULAR DOWNLOADS
 CDS Specification 
 CDS Guide Operation, Design, Performance and Maintenance 
 CDS Solutions Brochure 
 Manufacturing America's Infrastructure™
 Agency/Regulatory Guidance
 Our team is ready to provide you with expert advice and assistance on local regulatory requirements, resulting in faster approvals.
 Solution Development
 Our engineers can review your requirements, weigh all options, and recommend the optimal solution to integrate with your site designs.
 Technical Expertise
 Our engineers can assist by providing product specific engineering calculations such as hydraulics, buoyancy, foundation reactions, and unit sizing.
 Cost Estimates
 We can quickly provide engineer’s cost
estimates to assist with your solution
selection process.
 Site Specific Drawings
 Our engineers can provide site-specific drawings for proposals, project meetings, and submittals, helping you be more efficient with your time.
 On-site Assistance
 Contractors know time is money, so we provide preconstruction meetings, delivery coordination, and on-site installation support to ensure a timely, smooth installation.
 block needs to be placed in the location where the link block will be displayed--> 
 MORE FROM CONTECH
 Company 
 About Us 
 Press Releases 
 Markets 
 Newsletter 
 Events 
 Contact 
 Contact Us 
 Request Pricing 
 Emergency Project Request 
 Plants and Yards 
 International 
 Learn 
 Pipe Blog 
 Stormwater Blog 
 Technical Presentations 
 Careers 
 Join Us 
 Customers 
 Payments 
 YouTube 
 Facebook 
 LinkedIn 
 Twitter 
 Instagram 
 ©2026 Contech Engineered Solutions LLC 
 | 
 Terms and Conditions 
 | 
 Privacy Statement 
 | 
 Credit Application 
 | 
 800-338-1122 
 In the State of North Carolina, engineering services are provided by Contech Arch Engineering, Professional Corporation. 
 