=== página 1 ===
BANDIT™
BANDALONG™
STORMX™
Our Bandalong Litter Traps stop pollution while 
ﬂoating on the surface of waterways, creating
little to no effect on local ecology.
Protecting waterways
from litter since 2009.
stormwatersystems.com
Our passion for making a difference is matched only by our determination to 
manufacture and install trash traps that last in the most demanding conditions. 
We partner with municipalities, non-proﬁt organizations, educational institutions, 
and corporations to reduce the human impacts of litter and debris on our greatest 
natural resource… our waterways and oceans.

=== página 2 ===
Standard Bandalong Litter Trap Sizes:
Bandalong Bandit – 4’ wide x 6.5’ long (outside dimensions)
For use in more moderate velocities and narrow channels 20-25’ wide at top of bank.  
All HDPE (high density polyethylene) body, with 6” diameter ﬂoatation and collection 
booms.
Bandalong 320 –  7’ wide X 18’ long (outside dimensions)
For use in ﬂashy urban channels with velocities up to 10’/second widths up 200’ wide
at top of bank.   All 12” diameter HDPE ﬂoatation and collection booms with ﬂexible 
draft skirt.   Aluminum structural frame, rear gate and optional lift-out basket.
Bandalong 920 – 16’ wide X 31’ long 
For use in ﬂashy urban channels with velocities up to 10’/second widths up 200’ wide 
at top of bank.   All 12” diameter HDPE ﬂoatation and collection booms with ﬂexible 
draft skirt.   Aluminum structural frame, rear gate, and optional lift-out baskets (2).  
Aluminum handrails and walkways are optional.
Bandalong 922 – 16’ wide X 50’ long
For use in ﬂashy urban channels with velocities up to 10’/second widths up 200’ wide 
at top of bank.   All 12” diameter HDPE ﬂoatation and collection booms with ﬂexible 
draft skirt.   Aluminum structural frame, rear gate, and optional lift-out baskets (2).  
Aluminum handrails and walkways are optional.
*Custom sizes available
Bandalong Litter Trap
Instream Floatables Control Trap
stormwatersystems.com
TM
The Bandalong Litter Trap uses the natural current of the waterway to 
collect ﬂoating litter 24/7/365 without any mechanical assistance
• Patented tidal gate retains captured trash
• Will not restrict ﬂow, effect hydrology or cause ﬂooding
• Effective in low and high velocities
• Does not interfere with aquatic wildlife movement
• High visibility raises public awareness
• Highly adaptable to site speciﬁc challenges
• Various litter removal options
• 10 year limited warranty on HDPE booms
• Internationally proven with over 250 installations worldwide
“We in the city of Waycross engineering dept. have been extremely satisﬁed, 
not only with the superior build quality with which the Bandalong is crafted,  
but also with the ﬁrst-rate service after the sale and the commitment to quality 
and to clean water which Storm Water Systems, Inc. has demonstrated.” 
– Steve Pope, Project Manager
Engineering Department, City of Waycross

=== página 3 ===
call us at 888.730.5819
TM
Storm X
End of Pipe Netting Trash Trap
StormX netting trash trap is highly effective for ﬁrst ﬂush
and captures gross pollutants as small as 5mm.
• Overﬂows in hubs and weir models
• Industrial Grade Netting in HDPE and polyester materials
• Standard and Custom size stainless steel hubs
• Standard size units in three (3) versatile models
• Custom StormX units available
• Internationally proven with over 15 years of ﬁeld service

=== página 4 ===
stormwatersystems.com
“As physical best management practice, the Bandalong 
Litter Trap is a remarkably effective tool for capturing 
ﬂoating trash without impacting ﬁsh or wildlife health. 
But equal to their value as litter capturing devices, the 
Anacostia Watershed’s (8) Bandalong traps serve as 
remarkable teaching opportunities to educate the public 
about marine debris and river ecology and generating 
litter characterization data that informs public policy.”
storm water systems, inc.
196 Industrial Boulevard | Cleveland, Georgia 30528
888.730.5819  /  706.348.8201
sales@stormwatersystems.com
All Storm Water Systems, Inc. products are manufactured in Cleveland, Georgia USA
– Mike Bolinder, Former Anacostia RIverkeeper
Anacostia River, Washington, DC
