 
 
Policy Position Statement 
 
CIWEM, 106 to 109 Saffron Hill, London, EC1N 8QS. Charity Registration No. 1043409 (England & Wales) SC038212 (Scotland) 
policy@ciwem.org | 020 7831 3110 | www.ciwem.org  
 
Misconnections 
Purpose 
The purpose of this PPS is to set out  our priorities to achieve a sustained reduction in the 
incidence of misconnections and to reduce avoidable impacts to both foul and surface water 
sewer systems.  
CIWEM's position and recommendations  
1. Property owners and plumbers are frequently unaware whether a property is connected 
to combined or separate drainage.  Every water bill should state the type of drainage. 
2. Mortgage lenders, conveyancers and insurers should require a drainage survey when 
property changes ownership to check for (illegal) misconnected drainage.   
3. Property searches should include information on drainage systems and highlight the 
possibility and risk of misconnections.  
4. Local Authorities (LAs), environmental regulators1 (ERs), OFWAT and water and sewerage 
companies (WaSCs) should wor k to investigate and rectify both foul and clean 
misconnections based on prioritised areas where there are water quality impacts.  This 
should be included in their business plans.  
5. Key professionals and service sectors such as Building Control, surveyors, the Law 
Societies in Great Britain , Chartered Surveyors , Environmental Health Officers, the 
construction industry, architects, retailers of white goods etc should become involved in 
tackling the problem. Competency, assurance and approval schemes such as Watersafei 
and those operated by training bodies should address the misconnection issue.  
6. Government should explore s tatutory instruments such as General Binding Rules as a 
means of preventing pollution of surface water systems by requiring treatment of surface 
water discharges if they are contaminated , e.g. some type of sustainable drainage 
system, or at risk of contamination by misconnection.  
7. Manufacturers, suppliers and retailers of wastewater discharging appliances should help 
raise awareness about correct drainage connections.  
8. Building control approval bodies should do more to  ensure drainage practice accords 
with building regulations, e.g. requiring provision of photographs.  
                                                 
1 Environment Agency (EA), Scottish Environment Protection Agency (SEPA) , Natural Resources Wales 
(NRW) and Northern Ireland Environment Agency (NIEA) 
<<PAGE 1>>
 
CIWEM, 106 to 109 Saffron Hill, London, EC1N 8QS. Charity Registration No. 1043409 (England & Wales) SC038212 (Scotland) 
policy@ciwem.org | 020 7831 3110 | www.ciwem.org  
 
9. Defra and the Scottish Government should require new surface water drainage systems 
to be in the form of open channels wherever practicable so that the risk of 
misconnections is minimised by being detected rapidly. 
CIWEM is the leading independent Chartered professional body for water and 
environmental professionals, promoting excellence within the sector. 
Context  
Sewer systems are designed to be ei ther ‘separate’ (one for foul, one  for surface water) or 
‘combined’ (one sewer conveying foul and surface water, possibly with an overflow for excess 
flow). Misconnections are where wastewater is discharged into su rface water drainage or 
surface water is discharged into a foul sewer. This applies to separate sewer systems rather 
than combined ones. A bathroom misconnected to a surface water drain can put toilet waste 
straight into a stream.  Pollution of ‘controll ed’ water by misconnections is illegal , although 
difficult to enforce. 
Historic development of sewer and drainage networks 
In Britain, sewer networks have developed over many years since industrialisation and the 
growth of urban areasii.  The first sewers were almost always combined i.e. they collected both 
rainfall and foul flows.  Most of the older, inner city urban areas are therefore served by 
combined sewer networks.  With the continued growth of urban areas the extension of 
combined sewer networks was  not a practicable solution because of the overall volumes of 
water needing to be accommodated.  Consequently from around the 1950s (but as early as 
pre-World War I in some areas), sewer systems in developments became separated.  For about 
50% of properties, foul water is collected separately and taken for treatment whilst surface 
water from rainfall is piped separately to a nearby receiving watercourse or to groundwater.  
This principle is based on the premise that surface water is relatively fre e from polluting 
material and causes fewer water quality issues for the receiving watercourse. 
The separation of the flow between the two sewer systems has presented a number of 
problems for water quality. The principal one is that any foul sewage misconn ections of 
drainage from domestic, commercial and industrial premises can easily enter watercourses and 
so impact directly on water quality; this has had serious consequences in some areas.  Over 
the last twenty years there has been more development and ‘urban creep’ coupled with a trend 
for house improvements and some of this has resulted in misconnections.   
The scope of Building Control and planning regulation is limited and doesn’t extend to all 
drainage work so is not effective to prevent misconnections. A 2009 MORI Ipsos reportiii found 
a lack of awareness of the concept of separate sewer systems amongst professionals, building 
trades and the public and which type applies to a particular property and, worryingly, that 
awareness is becoming worse. 
<<PAGE 2>>
 
CIWEM, 106 to 109 Saffron Hill, London, EC1N 8QS. Charity Registration No. 1043409 (England & Wales) SC038212 (Scotland) 
policy@ciwem.org | 020 7831 3110 | www.ciwem.org  
 
What is misconnection? 
Misconnections or wrong connections are where drainage from a building or site has been 
connected to the wrong part of the sewer network.  These can be one of two types; a foul 
water misconnection to a surface water system , whereby sewage a nd polluted water is 
discharged directly to a river, stre am or the sea/beach or groundwater; or where rainwater 
enters foul sewers rather than discharging to surface or ground waters.   
With clean misconnections there can be indirect pollution due to combi ned sewer overflows 
i.e. when there is so much rainwater in the sewer that it overflows.  Misconnections affect the 
quality of the water and how we use it, as well as damaging the local ecology and recreation.  
Clean misconnections to foul or combined sewe rs also take up sewerage capacity and result 
in additional energy and conveyance costs. 
Misconnections can be above ground whereby appliances or drains are wrongly connected, 
for example refitting domestic toilets, kitchens and bathrooms.  They can also in clude below 
ground misconnections often due to mistakes by builders or developers or from infrastructure 
such as dual manholes.  The contamination of surface water sewers can also occur due to 
infiltration or leakage from contaminated ground, foul sewers, sewer blockages and failures.  
For the purposes of this paper, a misconnection is defined as being: "any direct discharge by 
third parties of wastewater to a separate surface water sewer, or of surface water or 
groundwater to a separate foul sewer or road drain". 
Pollutants 
Most of the UK population lives in urban areas.  Urban streams, rivers, lakes, canals and the 
sea are important features of their environments and often the most common way for people 
to interact with nature.  The aesthetics of urban watercourses are particularly adversely affected 
by misconnections.  Water can become cloudy, discoloured and smelly, there can be “litter” 
and in drier weather , sewage fungus or the effects of eutrophication may become more 
apparent just at the time when mor e people want to use these open spaces.  Many urban 
redevelopments now have water bodies as a central element of their design, emphasising how 
highly communities value these features.   Ensuring good water quality of shellfish waters and 
at beaches is also critical to the tourism industry and local economies.  Any adverse publicity 
about shellfish or bathing water quality at beaches can therefore have serious consequences.  
Foul sewage discharges contain many pollutants including nutrients like phosphorus a nd 
nitrogen, pathogens, sewage derived debris or oxygen depleting organic matter.  In addition, 
untreated sewage discharges may contribute to Environmental Quality Standard failures for 
certain EU priority substances and UK specific pollutants.   
Pollutants o f particular relevance to misconnections are; Nonyl -Phenols (NPs) and their 
Ethoxylates (NPEs) commonly found in imported clothing and released into the aquatic 
environment via washing clothes, (approximately 35% of all misconnections are from washing 
machines); steroids; (EE2), plasticisers; (DEHP); and biocides (TBT, tryclosan).  These pollutants 
contribute to the overall pollution loa d and pose a risk of future non -compliance with EU 
Water Framework, Bathing Water and Shellfish Waters Directives.  EA operational staff estimate 
that up to 49 bathing waters (9%) are impacted to some extent by misconnections. 
<<PAGE 3>>
 
CIWEM, 106 to 109 Saffron Hill, London, EC1N 8QS. Charity Registration No. 1043409 (England & Wales) SC038212 (Scotland) 
policy@ciwem.org | 020 7831 3110 | www.ciwem.org  
 
Scale of the challenge 
The challenge of misconnections is significant because of its ubiquity in most built -up areas.  
Areas with separate sewers bordering combined sewers can be especially problematic because 
even professionals can assume wrongly that a property is on a combined sewer.  Residents 
need to be more aware of the type of drainage serving their property; an easy way to achieve 
this would be for it to be displayed on every water bill. 
There are various estimates of the extent of sewer misconnections.  I n 2007 the Environment 
Agencyiv considered that as many as one in five properties have misconnections that 
discharge effluent into rivers.  A n UKWIR project v estimated the potential number of 
misconnections in each of the water company catchments and a national total of around 
140,000 properties. This was based on a 0.5% misconnection rate, property housing stock, 
types of drainage system and incidents of polluted outfalls.  Investigation of known polluted 
outfalls by Thames Water and Severn Trent Water from 2008 -2012 estimated an average of 
2.3% of properties have some sort of misconnection.  Of these misconnections approximately 
35% are due to above ground connections of washing machines, 10% dishwashers and 20% 
sinks with 5% being toilets and 1% being the whole property.  A significant number of other 
problems are due to infrastructure such as dual manholes.  Dual manholes allow shared access 
to both foul and surface water sewers that are sometimes in open channels.  As such they can 
allow cross contamination of foul to surface or surface to foul to occur.   
Building Control approval does require new drainage to be made to the correct sewer.  
However in practice the knowledge of site specific drainage systems and the priority attached 
to misconnections amongst Building Control Officers needs to be improved.  
Rectifying the problem 
There has been an extensive effort to investigate and rectify misc onnections since the 1990s 
by regulators, WaSCs and LAs.  WaSCs own most foul and surface water sewers since the 
transfer of private foul sewers in  England and Wales in  October 2011.  Highway authorities 
own most road drains. This has generally focused on the most obviously polluted outfalls and 
such effort is still essential for many watercourses.  Extensive investigation effort to ensure 
Bathing and Shellfish Water compliance is also ongoing particularly in the North West, South 
West and the South coast of England investigation projects, as in Wales .  These surveys are 
expensive and difficult to do , in contrast to the ease of causing a misconnection.  The total 
spend on investigation effort to date is not known.  The UKWIR vi report estimated 
investigation costs for all foul sewer misconnections might amount to £450M with rectification 
costs of around £50M.   
LAs are key partners in providing support by using their legal powers to ensure rec tifications 
but their capacity to do this is diminishing.  The EA is currently undertaking a trial to assess 
how it might use its own Anti Pollution Works Notices (APWNs) powers , where property 
owners fail to act voluntarily. This should be completed later in 2014 and may provide evidence 
to support the use of APWNs in future.  However, EA APWN powers are generic and not as 
effective as those available to LAs.  Regardless, legal action to rectify misconnections will 
remain costly, cumbersome and resource intensive. 
<<PAGE 4>>
 
CIWEM, 106 to 109 Saffron Hill, London, EC1N 8QS. Charity Registration No. 1043409 (England & Wales) SC038212 (Scotland) 
policy@ciwem.org | 020 7831 3110 | www.ciwem.org  
 
Multiple interventions 
Taking into account these uncertainties, the way forward would perhaps be to develop a mix 
of measures including both practical investigations and activity based on behavi our change 
and awareness.   
Raising awareness of which type of drainage serves a property  and the consequences of 
misconnections is in the hands of the WaSCs.  There is no reason why this information could 
not be included on water bills.  
Practical measures might be incorporated into catchment-based planning to focus on problem 
stretches and outfalls.  In some situations this might include the bespoke design of solut ions 
by the key partners i.e. water companies, EA and local authorities.  This suggests a requirement 
to firstly investigate and rectify misconnection problems from polluted outfall s alongside 
additional measures, to address aspects such as sewer maintenance, capacity improvements 
and removing surface water misconnections from foul sewerage systems.  In some situations 
it may be more cost effective and assured to incorporate treatmen t via sustainable drainage 
infrastructure (SuDS) rather than trace misconnections.  SuDS would also have other benefits 
relating to urban runoff and flood water management as well as improving habitats, amenity 
and providing a ‘safety net’ for water quality. 
Ongoing vigilance is needed to prevent problems re-occurring.  The diffuse nature of pollution 
from misconnections also means that regulatory and legal remedies are cumbersome and 
inefficient so cannot be relied upon.  Resolving the problems caused by m isconnections, 
especially at the catchment level, cannot be achieved through one -off interventions alone.  
Consequently, approaches based  on education, awareness  and collaboration are needed to 
complement investigation and rectification effort to remove misconnections.  There needs to 
be a ‘step change’ in raising awareness with both the public and professionals alike about 
misconnections alongside similar communication regarding the misuse of surface water 
sewers and diffuse urban drainage.   
Awareness 
The National Misconnections Strategy Group supported  by, amongst others,  all WaSCs, 
Consumer Council for Water, the Chartered Institute of Plumbing and Heating Engineers and 
the Local Authority Building Control organisation has embarked on some initiatives to  raise 
awareness with the public and professionals at a more strategic lev el.  A ‘connectright’ 
websitevii has been developed that incorporates a property checking facility to indicate the 
risks of having a misconnection, provides information and advice and directs visitors to 
Watersafe approved plumbers.  
There should be a legal requirement to check the drainage when a property changes 
ownership. This might be a slow process but it could be a very effective means of contributing 
to curing misconnections.  The costs for homeowners would be significant but not excessive 
(typically less than £300 for an average house).  It would also raise awareness of the subject, 
which could deter people from misconnecting and/or cause people to correct misconnections. 
July 2014 
<<PAGE 5>>
 
CIWEM, 106 to 109 Saffron Hill, London, EC1N 8QS. Charity Registration No. 1043409 (England & Wales) SC038212 (Scotland) 
policy@ciwem.org | 020 7831 3110 | www.ciwem.org  
 
Note: CIWEM Policy Position Statements (PPS) represents the Institution’s views on issues at a particular 
point in time. It is accepted that situations change as research provides new evidence. It should be 
understood, therefore, that CIWEM PPS’s are under constant review  and that previously held views may 
alter and lead to revised PPS’s. PPSs are produced as a consensus report and do not represent the view of 
individual members of CIWEM.  
References 
i www.watersafe.org.uk  
ii Evans, T. D. and Orman, N. (201 3) Urban Drainage and the Water Environment: a Sustainable Future.  
FWR FR/R0011 www.fwr.org/urbndnge.pdf 
iii MORI Ipsos Misconnections research 2009 – J34687 
iv Environment Agency (2007) The unseen threat to wa ter quality, Diffuse water pollution in England 
and Wales report 
v UKWIR Project WM07E305; Sewer misconnections – what is the true non -agricultural diffuse water 
pollution impact. 
vi UKWIR Project WM07E305; Sewer misconnections – what is the true non -agricultural diffuse water 
pollution impact. 
vii www.connectright.org.uk  
                                                 
<<PAGE 6>>
