This report is publicly available on the NYC Global Partners’ Innovation Exchange website  
        www.nyc.gov/globalpartners/innovationexchange  
 
 
 
 
Best Practice: Redeveloping Industrial Harbor for Public Swimming 
 
 
  
 
1
CITY:  COPENHAGEN                                      POLICY AREAS:  CITY PLANNING 
REPORT UPDATED:  AUGUST 10, 2011 
 
 
BEST PRACTICE  
 
On July 15, 2002, Copenhagen opened the Harbor Bath (“Havnebadet”) at Islands Brygge, just 200 metres from Copenhagen 
City Hall in order to provide Copenhageners with a clean environment for swimming, fishing and leisure activities.   
 
The Harbor Bath is an innovative example of how an industrial harbor can be redesigned as a recreational swimming facility 
by using technology to mitigate combined sewer overflows (CSOs).  Residents can also monitor swimming conditions on a 
designated website - www.kk.dk/Borger/ByOgTrafik/GroenneOmraader/badevand.aspx   
 
ISSUE  
 
The first swimming facility in the Copenhagen Harbor area opened in 1785 and throughout the 19th century several more 
were established.  But in 1953 the pollution level had increased, and combined with an improved general knowledge of 
bacteriology and viruses, swimming was banned for persons 16 years old and younger.  In 1954, all swimming in the harbor 
was banned.  
 
GOALS AND OBJECTIVES  
 
The Harbor Bath provides Copenhageners with a clean environment for swimming and leisure. The aim of the 
redevelopment of the industrial harbor area was to:   
 
• Provide Copenhageners with a clean environment for leisure activities 
• Improve water quality 
• Reduce costs related to cleanup of flooding from sewage overflows 
 
IMPLEMENTATION  
 
The development of the Harbor Bath was 
made possible by Copenhagen’s effort to 
mitigate combined sewer overflows (CSOs).  
A CSO is the discharge of wastewater and 
stormwater from a combined sewer system 
that flows directly into a river, stream, lake 
or ocean.  Over the last 20 years, 
Copenhagen invested in treatment plants 
and sewer systems, leading to an immense 
improvement of the wate r quality. The city 
also invested in underground reservoirs to 
m i n i m i z e  t h e  r i s k  o f  C S O s .    S t r u c t u r e s  
were established, equipped with 
transmitters to indicate risk of flooding.  
 
 
 
 
 

<<PAGE 1>>
This report is publicly available on the NYC Global Partners’ Innovation Exchange website  
        www.nyc.gov/globalpartners/innovationexchange  
 
 
 
 
Best Practice: Redeveloping Industrial Harbor for Public Swimming 
 
 
  
 
2
Meanwhile, the harbor area itself evolved from an industrial harbor to a harbor surrounded by residences and office buildings.  
Today marine recreational options are more important and the tr ansport of goods in the harbor is less prevalent. Public 
interest in establishing the Harbor Bath was intense and resulte d in the establishment of plans to build the Harbor Bath as 
early as the mid-1990s.   
 
Today every combined sewer overflow structure has at least one le vel transmitter that indicates when there is a risk of an 
overflow event. The transmitters continuously send inform ation to a central computer in the Waste Management 
Department at Copenhagen Energy, and every fifteen minute s data of overflow volumes are transmitted to Copenhagen 
Environmental Protection Agency (CEPA) and Danish Hydraulic Institute (DHI). If an overflow is spotted, a text message is 
sent automatically to the officials at the CEPA, Copenhagen Energy and DHI.   
 
The CEPA decides whether a red flag should be hoisted at the swimming facilities.  If the red flag is hoisted, DHI starts 
calculations in a model that uses online data.  For safety reasons, if the E-coli count exceeds 500 per 100 ml of water, then 
the agency is notified and a public warning is issued. 
 
Data on the actual situation of the swimming facilities can be monitored by the public at any time during the swimming season 
on the Internet. The Internet address is http://www.kk.dk/Borger/ByOgTrafik/GroenneOmraader/badevand.aspx  
 
COST  
 
Investments in the sewage system do not solely relate to swimming water quality but also to rehabilitation and flooding. The 
annual investments in the sewage systems of Copenhagen are approximately 200 million DKK (approx. 38 million USD).  
 
RESULTS AND EVALUATION  
 
Copenhagen’s harbor was formerly used for industrial purposes such as goods 
transport and ferry services. As the industrial activities moved to new harbor 
areas, only ferries and cruisers remained, mostly in the northern part of 
Copenhagen.  Today, the harbor areas at the centre of the city scarcely have 
sailing traffic, and along the harbor basins residence and office buildings are 
being built.  Recreational activities such as kayak-polo, canoeing, kayaking, and 
yacht sailing are taking over the water areas. Citizens now have swimming 
facilities as well. 
 
 
TIMELINE  
 
1996:   Masterplan for sewage sy stem of Copenhagen requires a 50% reduction in CSOs to the harbor 
1996:   Real time control introduced in sewers 
1998:   First two retention tanks established – several to follow 
2000:   New masterplan for sewer system introduces water quality goals for 2010  
2002:   First swimming facility in the inner harbor of Copenhagen 
EU’s blue flag indicates good water quality in the beach of Amager, Copenhagen 
2010:   Inner harbor now determined swimming water (one local exception) 
2015:   Goal - all marine receiving waters of Copenhagen are determined of swimming quality 

<<PAGE 2>>
This report is publicly available on the NYC Global Partners’ Innovation Exchange website  
        www.nyc.gov/globalpartners/innovationexchange  
 
 
 
 
Best Practice: Redeveloping Industrial Harbor for Public Swimming 
 
 
  
 
3
2000-2015:  Massive investments in sewer system, including rehabilitation, control systems and new treatment 
technologies will be implemented 
 
LEGISLATION  
 
The EU Swimming Water Directive is the driver behind the planning of CSO control measures.  Since 2000, the Directive 
had been included in the Sewerage Plan of Copenhagen and continually revised. 
 
LESSONS LEARNED  
 
From 2000 to 2011 there was an increase in the frequency of extreme rainfalls, e.g. during the 2. July 2011 rain storm more 
than 150 mm fell in less than two hours. This is challengin g to the systems, and a disconne ction of stormwater from the 
combined sewer system is now strongly promoted. 
 
Since it opened in 2002, twenty rain events caused the closur e of the swimming facility for a total of 30 days. The closures 
were determined by the Danish Hydraulic Institute’s (DHI) monitoring devices.  Compulsory weekly swimming water control 
tests of the E-coli concentration showed a concentration far below the threshold for swimming water and also show that the 
actual E-coli concentration is considerably lower than previously  calculated, an indicator that the alarm system works safely.  
 
The best security against swimming in polluted water is to avoi d combined sewer overflow at all. As this is technically and 
economically impossible, it is important that the alarm system performs flawlessly; especially until the sewer system is fully 
developed.  
 
The main sources of error turned out to be that one or more  level transmitters returned wrong values (typically due to 
wrong calibration or because the transmitter has been pushed out of its place) and that signals to DHI have an outfall. As 
there are more than 30 transmitters connected to the alarm system, the error of one transmitter is not crucial for the safety 
of the alarm system; however, a great effort is still requir ed in order to secure the right information from the level 
transmitters. If the signals have an outfall, it is easy to detect and correct. 
 
Apart from telling when there is CSO and risk of polluted sw imming water, the alarm system  also calculates when clean 
swimming water will be obtained again, ba sed on the safest swimming conditions for residents. Later comparisons show that 
the modelling is safe regarding E-coli concentration. Even though  the model is adjusted on this basis, the basic philosophy for  
the alarm system is to calculate conservativ ely to ensure that there is no risk con nected to swimming in the harbor, even 
though this may cause the swimming facilities to close unnecessarily. 
 
TRANSFERABILITY  
 
For cities considering opening a safe area for swimming and marine recreational activities in a formerly industrial harbor, the  
Harbor Bath is a case study to consider given its innovative use of technology to monitor the CSOs.   
 
CONTACTS  
 
Copenhagen Energy 
Jes Clauson-Kaas 
Water and Wastewater Planner 
City of Copenhagen 
+45 27954627 
jecl@ke.dk 
www.ke.dk 
 
<<PAGE 3>>
This report is publicly available on the NYC Global Partners’ Innovation Exchange website  
        www.nyc.gov/globalpartners/innovationexchange  
 
 
 
 
Best Practice: Redeveloping Industrial Harbor for Public Swimming 
 
 
  
 
4
Mayor’s Office for the City of Copenhagen Center for Park and Nature, Copenhagen (CEPA) 
Lars Lindholm Jan Burgdorf Nielsen 
Finance Administration Marine and Fresh Wate r 
City Hall 
1599 Copenhagen V 
Islands Brygge 37  
2300 Copenhagen  S 
Phone + 45 3366 2148 Phone +45 33 66 33 66  
E-mail lal@okf.kk.dk E-mail  janbni@tmf.kk.dk 
www.kk.dk  
 
 
 
Facts and figures in this report were provided by the highlighted city agencies to New York City Global Partners.  
<<PAGE 4>>
