ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION 
AND ELIMINATION MANUAL
A Handbook for Municipalities
NEW ENGLAND INTERSTATE WATER POLLUTION CONTROL COMMISSION
January 2003

<<PAGE 0>>
This page is intentionally blank.
<<PAGE 1>>
ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION 
AND ELIMINATION MANUAL
A Handbook for Municipalities
Prepared by the
NEW ENGLAND INTERSTATE WATER POLLUTION CONTROL COMMISSION
Boott Mills South
100 Foot of John Street
Lowell, Massachusetts 01852
Ronald F. Poltak, Executive Director
COMPACT MEMBER STATES
Connecticut 
Maine  
Massachusetts
New Hampshire
New York
Rhode Island
Vermont
Copies of this document may be downloaded from www.neiwpcc.org.
January 2003
<<PAGE 2>>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This manual was developed by the New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission
(NEIWPCC). NEIWPCC is a nonprofit interstate agency, established by an Act of Congress in 1947, that
serves its member states (Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York, Rhode Island,
and Vermont) by providing coordination, public education, training, and leadership in the management and
protection of water quality. 
This project was initiated by NEIWPCC’s Storm Water Workgroup, which is composed of state and federal
environmental agency staff. The group perceived a need for resources to help municipalities in NEIWPCC-
member states that are regulated under the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) Phase II storm
water program comply with regulatory requirements. This manual is intended to help municipalities
develop illicit discharge detection and elimination programs—one of the six minimum control measures
under Phase II.
This manual was made possible by a grant from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The contents
do not necessarily reflect the views and policies of EPA or NEIWPCC’s member states, nor does the
mention of trade names or commercial products constitute endorsement or recommendation for use.
This manual was compiled and written by Rebekah Lacey, with assistance from Kim Starbuck and other
NEIWPCC staff. Editing, graphic design, and layout were performed by Ellen Frye and Ricki Pappo of
ENOSIS. Thelma Murphy served as the EPA Project Officer. NEIWPCC would like to thank Andrea
Donlon, NHDES, for her many contributions to this document, which included providing information,
comments, and photographs—most of the photographs in the manual were either provided by Andrea or
taken by NEIWPCC staff while accompanying Andrea on field work. 
NEIWPCC would also like to thank the following people who contributed their time in providing
information for and/or reviewing the manual:
Interviews or Other Information
Kathy Baskin, Charles River Watershed Association
Paul Barden, BWSC
Michael Cuneo, Town of Dedham, MA
Andrea Donlon, NHDES
Tim Grover, City of Winooski, VT
Charlie Jewell, BWSC
Natalie Landry, NHDES
Ginny Scarlet, MADEP
Review
Jeff Andrews, NHDES
Andrea Donlon, NHDES
Bryant Firmin, MADEP
Greg Goblick, RIDEM
Tim Grover, City of Winooski, VT
David Ladd, MEDEP
Steve Lipman, MADEP
Thomas Mahin, MADEP
Thelma Murphy, USEPA
Jim Pease, VTDEC
Ginny Scarlet, MADEP
Chris Stone, CTDEP
<<PAGE 3>>
5
CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 4
CONTENTS 5
ACRONYMS 7
INTRODUCTION 9
Who Administers the Phase II Storm Water Program? 9
What Is Regulated Under Phase II? 9
Where Does IDDE Fit In? 10
About This Manual 10
GETTING STARTED WITH YOUR IDDE PROGRAM 11
What Is an Illicit Discharge? 11
What Are the Elements of an IDDE Program? 11
References: Chapter 1 12
DEVELOPING A STORM SEWER MAP 13
Conducting a Field Survey 13
Mapping Options 13
Figure 1: Sample Map 15
Prioritizing Areas to be Mapped 15
References: Chapter 2 16
PROHIBITING ILLICIT DISCHARGES 17
Illicit Discharge Ordinances 17
References: Chapter 3 18
DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING AN IDDE PLAN: LOCATING PRIORITY AREAS 19
Identifying Possible Hot Spots 19
Conducting Dry-Weather Outfall/Manhole Surveys 20
Conducting Water Quality Tests 22
Table 1: Water Quality Test Parameters and Uses 23
References: Chapter 4 24
4
3
2
1
<<PAGE 4>>
IDDE MANUAL 
Contents
6
DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING AN IDDE PLAN:
TRACING THE SOURCE OF AN ILLICIT DISCHARGE 25
Manhole Observations 25
Video Inspection 26
Smoke Testing 26
Dye Testing 26
Aerial Infrared and Thermal Photography 27
Tracking Illegal Dumping 28
References: Chapter 5 29
DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING AN IDDE PLAN: 
REMOVING THE SOURCE OF AN ILLICIT DISCHARGE 31
Compliance Assistance and Enforcement for Illegal Connections to Homes and Businesses 31
Proper Construction and Maintenance of MS4s 33
Preventing and Responding to Illegal Dumping 34
References: Chapter 6 35
DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING AN IDDE PLAN: EVALUATION OF THE IDDE PROGRAM 37
Evaluation Strategy 37
References: Chapter 7 38
OUTREACH TO EMPLOYEES, BUSINESSES, AND THE GENERAL PUBLIC 39
Public Employees 39
Businesses 40
General Public 40
References: Chapter 8 41
BMPS AND MEASURABLE GOALS FOR IDDE 43
Getting Started 43
References: Chapter 9 45
RESOURCES 47
Web Sites and Publications 47
Contacts 51
APPENDIX A: MODEL ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION STORM WATER ORDINANCE 53
10
9
8
7
6
5
<<PAGE 5>>
7
ACRONYMS
BMP Best Management Practice 
BWSC Boston Water and Sewer Commission
GIS Geographic Information System
GPS Global Positioning System
IDDE Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination
MS4 Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NOV Notice of Violation
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
CTDEP Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection
MEDEP Maine Department of Environmental Protection
MADEP Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection 
NHDES New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services 
NYSDEC New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
RIDEM Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management
VTDEC Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation
<<PAGE 6>>
This page is intentionally blank.
<<PAGE 7>>
9
INTRODUCTION
Although the quality of the nation’s waters has improved greatly since the passage of
the Clean Water Act in 1972, many water bodies are still impaired by pollution.
According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) 2000 National Water
Quality Inventory, 39 percent of assessed river and stream miles, 46 percent of assessed
lake acres, and 51 percent of assessed estuarine square miles do not meet water quali-
ty standards. The top causes of impairment include siltation, nutrients, bacteria, metals
(primarily mercury), and oxygen-depleting substances. Polluted storm water runoff,
including runoff from urban/suburban areas and construction sites, is a leading source
of this impairment. To address this problem, EPA has put into place a program that reg-
ulates certain storm water discharges.
In 1990, EPA promulgated Phase I of its storm water program under the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit provisions of the Clean
Water Act. Phase I addressed storm water runoff from “medium” and “large” munici-
pal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s) generally serving populations of 100,000 or
greater, construction activity that would disturb five or more acres of land, and 10 cat-
egories of industrial activity. To further reduce the adverse effects of storm water
runoff, EPA instituted its Storm Water Phase II Final Rule on December 8, 1999.
WHO ADMINISTERS THE PHASE II STORM WATER PROGRAM?
The Phase II storm water program is part of EPA’s NPDES program, which in many
states is delegated to state authorities to administer. Connecticut, Maine, New York,
Rhode Island, and Vermont are authorized to serve as NPDES permitting authorities.
EPA Region 1 serves as the permitting authority for Massachusetts and New Hampshire.
EPA is also the permitting authority for all federally recognized Indian Country lands
and for federal facilities in Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Vermont.
WHAT IS REGULATED UNDER PHASE II?
Phase II regulates discharges from small MS4s located in “urbanized areas” (as delin-
eated by the Census Bureau in the most recent census) and from additional small MS4s
designated by the permitting authority. Phase II also regulates construction activities
that would disturb between one and five acres of land. In addition, the Phase II Final
Rule ends the temporary exemption from Phase I requirements for some municipally
operated industrial activities1 and revises the “no exposure” provision for Phase I-reg-
ulated industrial activities. 
MS4s are typically operated by municipalities, but the Phase II definition of “munici-
pal separate storm sewer systems” includes storm sewer systems owned or operated by
other public bodies (e.g., states, counties, Indian tribes, departments of transportation,
universities). EPA also notes that an MS4 is not always just a system of underground
pipes; it can include roads with drainage systems, gutters, and ditches. 
1 This temporary exemption was provided by the Intermodal Surface Transportation Act (ISTEA) of 1991.
Polluted storm water
runoff, including
runoff from
urban/suburban areas
and construction
sites, is a leading
source of water
quality impairment. 
To address this
problem, EPA has put
into place a program
that regulates certain
storm water
discharges.
<<PAGE 8>>
The rules for determining which small MS4s are regulated under Phase II are somewhat
complex; MS4 operators should consult the NPDES permitting authority for their state
to determine whether their MS4s are regulated. Note also that requirements may be dif-
ferent if a municipality is located only partially within an urbanized area.
WHERE DOES IDDE FIT IN?
EPA’s Phase II rule specifies that permitting authorities must issue general permits for
"automatically designated" small MS4s by December 9, 2002. The rule requires that
operators of these automatically designated small MS4s apply for NPDES permit cov-
erage within 90 days of permit issuance, and no later than March 10, 2003 2. To obtain
this coverage, an MS4 operator must develop, implement, and enforce a storm water
management program that is designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the max-
imum extent practicable, protect water quality, and satisfy the applicable water quality
requirements of the Clean Water Act. EPA’s Storm Water Phase II Final Rule states that
this storm water management program must include the following six minimum con-
trol measures:
• Public education and outreach on storm water impacts
• Public involvement and participation
➤ Illicit discharge detection and elimination (IDDE)
• Construction site storm water runoff control
• Post-construction storm water management in new development and redevelop-
ment
• Pollution prevention and good housekeeping for municipal operations
As part of their applications for permit coverage, MS4 operators must identify the best
management practices they will use to comply with each of the six minimum control
measures and the measurable goals they have set for each measure. 
ABOUT THIS MANUAL
This manual is intended to help municipalities in the New England states and New York
develop illicit discharge detection and elimination (IDDE) programs required by EPA’s
Phase II storm water program. EPA’s Phase II storm water regulations provide guide-
lines that are used by permitting authorities in writing their permits. This manual pro-
vides general information based on EPA’s Phase II storm water regulations; it is impor-
tant to consult the permitting authority in your state (see Chapter 10) to find out about
state-specific requirements.
Chapter 1 explains the IDDE requirement of EPA’s Phase II regulations. Chapters 2
through 8 describe the required elements of an IDDE program and provide information
to help municipalities execute each of these elements. Chapter 9 provides information
on best management practices and measurable goals for IDDEs. Chapter 10 lists addi-
tional resources and contacts that may be helpful in developing an IDDE program.
10
IDDE MANUAL 
Introduction
2 There are some exceptions to this deadline; contact the permitting authority in your state for up-to-date
official information.
EPA’s Phase II storm
water regulations
provide guidelines
that are used by
permitting authorities
in writing their
permits.  This manual
provides general
information based on
EPA’s Phase II storm
water regulations; it
is important to
consult the permitting
authority in your state
to find out about
state-specific
requirements.
<<PAGE 9>>
11
GETTING STARTED WITH 
YOUR IDDE PROGRAM1
As you set out to develop your illicit discharge
detection and elimination (IDDE) program, you will need
to start by making sure that you know the answers to
two key questions: (1) What is an illicit discharge? and
(2) What are the required elements of an IDDE program?
In this chapter we’ll review the answers to these
questions; we’ll provide supporting information and
details in subsequent chapters.
Illicit 
discharge 
Any discharge to a
municipal separate
storm sewer that is
not composed entirely
of storm water, except
discharges pursuant
to an NPDES permit
and discharges
resulting from fire-
fighting activities.
WHAT IS AN ILLICIT DISCHARGE?
The term “illicit discharge” is defined in EPA’s Phase II storm water regulations as “any
discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer that is not composed entirely of storm
water, except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit and discharges resulting from
fire-fighting activities.”
Illicit discharges can be categorized as either direct or indirect. 
➤ Examples of direct illicit discharges: 
• sanitary wastewater piping that is directly connected from a home to the storm
sewer
• materials (e.g., used motor oil) that have been dumped illegally into a storm
drain catch basin
•a  shop floor drain that is connected to the storm sewer
•a  cross-connection between the municipal sewer and storm sewer systems
➤ Examples of indirect illicit discharges:
• an old and damaged sanitary sewer line that is leaking fluids into a cracked
storm sewer line
•a  failing septic system that is leaking into a cracked storm sewer line or caus-
ing surface discharge into the storm sewer
WHAT ARE THE ELEMENTS OF AN IDDE PROGRAM?
EPA’s Phase II regulations state that an IDDE program must incorporate the following
four elements.
➤ Develop (if not already completed) a storm sewer system map showing the loca-
tion of all outfalls, and the names and location of all waters of the United States
that receive discharges from those outfalls.

<<PAGE 10>>
➤ To the extent allowable under state, tribal, or local law, effectively prohibit
through ordinance, or other regulatory mechanism, illicit discharges into the
separate storm sewer system and implement appropriate enforcement procedures
and actions as needed.
➤ Develop and implement a plan to detect and address illicit discharges, including
illegal dumping, to the system.
➤ Inform public employees, businesses, and the general public of hazards associat-
ed with illegal discharges and improper disposal of waste.
For each of these mandatory elements, EPA suggests a variety of approaches that can
help in creating a successful IDDE program. The mandatory elements and the suggest-
ed approaches will be discussed further in the next seven chapters. 
IDDE MANUAL 
Getting Started with Your IDDE Program
12
1
NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGES THAT YOUR IDDE PROGRAM MAY NOT NEED TO ADDRESS
According to EPA’s Phase II storm water regulations, an illicit discharge detection and elimination program
need only address the following categories of non-storm water discharges if the operator of a small MS4
identifies them as significant contributors of pollutants to the MS4: 
• water line flushing 
• landscape irrigation 
• diverted stream flows 
• rising ground waters 
• uncontaminated ground water infiltration 
• uncontaminated pumped ground water 
• discharges from potable water sources 
• foundation drains 
• air conditioning condensation 
• irrigation water 
• springs 
• water from crawl space pumps 
• footing drains 
• lawn watering 
• individual residential car washing 
• flows from riparian habitats and wetlands 
• dechlorinated swimming pool discharges 
• street wash water 
REFERENCES: CHAPTER 1
USEPA. 1999. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System – Regulations for Revision of the Water
Pollution Control Program Addressing Storm Water Discharges; Final Rule. Federal Register Vol. 64 No.
235 (December 8, 1999), pp. 68722-68851. http://www.epa.gov/npdes/regulations/phase2.pdf
USEPA. 2000. EPA Storm Water Phase II Final Rule Fact Sheet 2.5: Illicit Discharge Detection and
Elimination Minimum Control Measure. EPA 833-F-00-007. January 2000.
http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/swfinal.cfm
<<PAGE 11>>
CONDUCTING A FIELD SURVEY
A field survey of outfall locations will often be necessary to create a map or verify and
update an existing map. The References section at the end of the chapter provides a
Web link for a sample guide for conducting a storm drain mapping survey (MA
DFWELE, 2002). Field outfall surveys generally include the following basic steps: 
➤ Survey receiving waters on foot or by boat to look for all outfalls (i.e., wade small
receiving waters or use a boat for larger receiving waters).
➤ Note the locations of outfalls on a map. The map scale should be such that out-
falls can be located accurately. 
➤ Assign a code or label to each outfall. Adopt a logical, easy-to-understand system
(e.g., distance along the stream).
➤ Fill out a survey sheet for each outfall, noting characteristics such as dry weath-
er discharge and deposits or stains.
MAPPING OPTIONS
For municipalities that do not already have a storm sewer map, it is important to deter-
mine the type of map (e.g., topographic, hand or computer drafted) that best fits your
needs. Because there is no specific mapping standard in the Phase II rule, the goal of a
mapping program should be functionality—find a way to map outfalls such that you
13
DEVELOPING A STORM SEWER MAP2
The creation of a storm sewer map is the first
mandatory element of an IDDE program. Phase II
requires that the operator of a regulated MS4
develop a map of the MS4 that shows, at a
minimum, the location of all outfalls and the names
and locations of all waters of the United States that
receive discharges from those outfalls. While many
municipalities in the Northeast already have
detailed maps of their storm sewer systems, others,
typically those in older or more rural areas, have
the information scattered in different locations.
These municipalities will have the most work to do
to comply with this requirement. If you need to
develop a map, begin by collecting any existing
information on outfall locations (e.g., review city
records, drainage maps, storm drain maps, state or 
federal storm water permit files, state transportation 
maintenance maps), and then conduct field surveys to verify the locations.
The goal of a
mapping program
should be
functionality—find a
way to map outfalls
such that you (and the
permitting authority)
can locate any
specific outfall to
check on discharges.
<<PAGE 12>>
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing a Storm Sewer Map
14
2
(and the permitting authority) can locate any spe-
cific outfall to check on discharges. The most basic
way to meet the mapping requirement is to use an
existing map (e.g., a topographic map) that shows
receiving waters. You can then mark outfall loca-
tions on the map by hand (using existing informa-
tion augmented by a field survey). Make sure the
names of receiving waters are shown on the map;
for receiving waters that don’t have names, it is
helpful to indicate the nearest named water body
downstream. The graphic at the beginning of this
chapter shows an example of a marked-up United
States Geological Survey map (markings do not
represent actual outfalls). The next step up is a more
sophisticated paper map (e.g., blueprint-style).
Figure 1 presents an example of a simple paper map showing outfalls and other key fea-
tures of the storm sewer system. 
In many municipalities, a paper map may be completely adequate for carrying out an
IDDE program. However, if your MS4 has the resources, or if your municipality has a
complex storm sewer system, you may want to make use of available computer tech-
nology in making your map.
Global Positioning System (GPS) technology can be used to obtain the coordinates
(longitude and latitude) for each outfall. A GPS unit, which uses data from the U.S.
Department of Defense’s constellation of GPS satellites to constantly update position,
can be carried with you on your field survey. A particular position can be recorded and
later downloaded into a Geographic Information System (GIS) database. Using GIS,
the coordinates can be linked with other site-specific information, such as a picture and
history of the outfall. GPS units can be purchased or rented.
There are various computerized mapping programs. A GIS program (e.g., ArcGIS)
combines a georeferenced database with mapping capability, so that different geo-
graphical attributes (e.g., streets, outfalls, land use, monitoring data) can be mapped as
CAN A DITCH BE AN OUTFALL? 
The paragraph below is an excerpt from EPA’s Storm Water Phase II Final Rule (USEPA, 1999).
The term “outfall” is defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(9) as “a point source at the point where a municipal separate
storm sewer discharges to waters of the United States.” The term “municipal separate storm sewer” is
defined at 40 CFR 122.26(b)(8) as “a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage sys-
tems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains).”
Following the logic of these definitions, a “ditch” may be part of the municipal separate storm sewer, and at
the point where the ditch discharges to waters of the United States, it is an outfall. As with any determination
about jurisdictional provisions of the CWA, however, final decisions require case-specific evaluations of fact.

<<PAGE 13>>
15
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing a Storm Sewer Map2
“layers” and displayed either separately or together. AutoCAD®, a design/drafting plat-
form, is another program commonly used for storm sewer mapping. 
If you plan to map via computer, decide if you want to make the mapping system com-
patible with other departments within your municipality and/or with other data sources
(e.g., state agencies that provide GIS layers). Since storm sewer systems are often con-
structed in roadways, the use of the GIS road line data layer can be helpful in develop-
ing a map. If this layer is available, it is usually very accurate and frequently updated
by state or regional agencies. Local or regional planning commissions may be able to
provide assistance with GIS technology and map development. Once a particular soft-
ware system has been chosen, it is helpful to require developers to submit compatible
electronic updates for subsequent development to ensure that the map and data remain
current after the initial mapping effort is finished.
PRIORITIZING AREAS TO BE MAPPED
You may find that practical considerations will dictate the need to conduct mapping in
phases. In this case, it is best to prioritize your mapping agenda. For example, older
developed areas are more likely to have illicit discharges than newer areas for various
reasons (e.g., many municipalities have imposed inspection requirements on new con-
struction that help to prevent illegal connections). Therefore, if your community has
limited resources, you would benefit from mapping the older areas first to ensure that
priority areas are mapped. 
Other considerations in
setting mapping priori-
ties include land uses,
reports of illicit dis-
charges, and other
information specific to
each MS4. Although
EPA’s Phase II regula-
tions require that only
outfalls be mapped,
once an illicit discharge
is detected at an outfall,
it may be necessary to
map the portion of the
storm sewer system
leading to the outfall so
that you are able to
locate the source of the
discharge. If possible,
mapping the entire
storm sewer system
may prove very helpful
to your IDDE program.
Smith Creek
unnam
ed
stream
C3
C1
C1
M1
M1
Stream 1 mile 1.2
Stream 1 
mile 2.1
24" pipe
15" pipe
24" pipe
Smith Creek
mile 5
C2
/northarrow1
scale
Waterbodies
Major Pipes
Outfall Point
Storm Water Inlet
Manhole
Revised December 2002
You may find 
that practical
considerations will
dictate the need to
conduct mapping in
phases. In this case, it
is best to prioritize
your mapping agenda. 
Figure 1 SAMPLE MAP
<<PAGE 14>>
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing a Storm Sewer Map
16
2
REFERENCES: CHAPTER 2
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, Water Quality Control Division. 2001. Colorado’s
Phase II Municipal Guidance: A guide to application requirements and program development for coverage
under Colorado’s Phase II municipal stormwater discharge permit.
http://www.cdphe.state.co.us/wq/PermitsUnit/wqcdpmt.html
Massachusetts Division of Fisheries, Wildlife, and Environmental Law Enforcement. 2002. Storm Drain
Mapping Project Field Manual (Draft). http://www.state.ma.us/dfwele/River/pdf/rivstormdrainmanual.pdf
Oakland County, Michigan. 2002. Illicit Discharge Elimination Program.
http://www.co.oakland.mi.us/drain/program_service/illicit_disch.html
Pitt, R., M. Lalor, R. Field, D.D. Adrian, and D. Barbe. 1993. Investigation of Inappropriate Pollutant Entries
into Storm Drainage Systems: A User’s Guide. USEPA Office of Research and Development. 
EPA/600/R-92/238. http://www.epa.gov/clariton
Rohrer, C.A., and Beckley, R.J. Undated. Using GIS Tools to Implement an Illicit Discharge Elimination
Program in Livonia, Michigan. Rouge River Demonstration Project. http://www.rougeriver.com/proddata 
USEPA. 1999. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System – Regulations for Revision of the Water
Pollution Control Program Addressing Storm Water Discharges; Final Rule. Federal Register Vol. 64 No.
235 (December 8, 1999), pp. 68722-68851. http://www.epa.gov/npdes/regulations/phase2.pdf

<<PAGE 15>>
17
PROHIBITING ILLICIT DISCHARGES3
The second mandatory element of a Phase II IDDE
program requires that MS4 operators “to the extent
allowable under State, Tribal, or local law, effectively
prohibit through ordinance, or other regulatory
mechanism, illicit discharges into the separate storm
sewer system and implement appropriate
enforcement procedures and actions as needed.” 
A municipal
ordinance created to
comply with Phase II
regulations must
include a prohibition
of illicit discharges
and an enforcement
mechanism.
Town of Anywhere Ordinances
ILLICIT DISCHARGE ORDINANCES
As EPA’s guidance specifies, a municipal ordinance created to comply with Phase II
regulations must include a prohibition of illicit discharges and an enforcement mecha-
nism. Note that it is also essential for the municipality to establish legal authority to
inspect properties suspected of releasing contaminated discharges into the storm sewer
system. Your municipality may already have a sewer use ordinance or similar bylaw
that meets Phase II requirements, or that can be amended to meet the requirements.
Consult with your town counsel and other municipal authorities to review your town’s
existing bylaws and regulations and determine what changes or additions are needed
and what the procedure is for making those changes. If you need to make changes, you
may want to review the model bylaws and other guidance discussed below.
EPA’s nonpoint source pollution program Web site offers several examples of local
ordinances for illicit discharges (USEPA, 2002). Appendix A of this manual presents
EPA’s general model ordinance, which synthesizes a number of existing municipal
ordinances. In using any of these ordinances as a model, a community should take into
account the legal authority granted to it under state law, the Phase II permit require-
ments in that state, the enforcement methods it deems appropriate, and any other local-
ity-specific considerations.
A workgroup chaired by Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection
(MADEP) staff has been working on developing model bylaws that municipalities in
the state can use to help them comply with Phase II regulations. The products of this
group’s work (model bylaws and associated guidance) are expected to be available on
the MADEP Web site (see Chapter 10) by the time this manual is published. This group
found that many of the available model ordinances did not fit well with the structure of
Massachusetts government and, therefore, developed models that would work for
towns in the state. The group also found that entry onto private property can be a tricky
legal issue and should be treated carefully in any new or amended bylaws.
The Boston Water and Sewer Commission’s (BWSC’s) Regulations Governing the Use
of Sanitary and Combined Sewers and Storm Drains are available on the Web
(http://www.bwsc.org; click on “Engineering” then “Regulations”) and may serve as a
useful local model. The regulations specify certain conditions under which BWSC
<<PAGE 16>>
IDDE MANUAL 
Prohibiting Illicit Discharges
18
3
representatives must be granted access to property; denial of access may lead to termi-
nation of water service.
Note that illicit discharges to storm sewers should be addressed hand-in-hand with the
issue of illegal connections of extraneous water to sanitary sewers (typically referred
to as infiltration/inflow or I/I programs); bylaws or regulations should make clear
which discharges belong in which system.
REFERENCES: CHAPTER 3
BWSC. 2002. Regulations Governing the Use of Sanitary and Combined Sewers and Storm Drains.
http://www.bwsc.org
Personal communication from Ginny Scarlet, MADEP, November 29, 2002.
USEPA. 1999. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System – Regulations for Revision of the Water
Pollution Control Program Addressing Storm Water Discharges; Final Rule. Federal Register Vol. 64 No.
235 (December 8, 1999), pp. 68722-68851.
USEPA. 2002. Model Ordinances to Protect Local Resources: Illicit Discharges.
http://www.epa.gov/owow/nps/ordinance/discharges.htm
<<PAGE 17>>
The process of identifying “priority areas” can be broken down into
three steps:
➤ Use available information to identify potential hot spots
➤ Conduct dry-weather field screening to look for non-storm
water discharges
➤ Conduct water quality tests to see if these non-storm water
discharges seem to be illicit discharges
The following sections focus on each of these approaches.
IDENTIFYING POSSIBLE HOT SPOTS
“Hot spots” are areas that are considered to be likely sources of illic-
it discharges, based on available information. The following list pro-
vides examples of potential hot spots.
Commercial/ industrial areas These areas have been found in some communities’
IDDE programs to (a) have significant numbers of illicit connections and/or (b) have
discharges with a high potential to affect water quality (Tuomari, 1999 and Pitt et al.,
1993). Specific business sectors can be prioritized (e.g., businesses subject to waste
water pretreatment rules, businesses falling under certain Standard Industrial
Classification [SIC] codes, or business sectors with a record of enforcement actions).
Older areas of town Older development may predate more stringent construction codes
regarding illegal connections and may have deteriorating sewer and/or storm sewer
infrastructure that can lead to infiltration problems.
19
DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING AN IDDE PLAN: 
LOCATING PRIORITY AREAS4
Developing and implementing a plan to detect and address
illicit discharges is the third mandatory element of a Phase II
IDDE program. EPA recommends that the plan include the
following four components: locating priority areas; tracing the
source of an illicit discharge; removing the source of an illicit
discharge; and program evaluation and assessment. The first
component, locating priority areas, is the subject of this chap-
ter. Each of the other three components will be discussed in
chapters five, six, and seven respectively.
THE IDDE PLAN
➤ Locating priority areas
•T racing the source of an
illicit discharge 
• Removing the source of an
illicit discharge 
•P rogram evaluation and
assessment
Hot spots
Areas that are
considered to be
likely sources of
illicit discharges,
based on available
information. 
<<PAGE 18>>
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing and Implementing an IDDE Plan: Locating Priority Areas
20
4
Areas where there have been repeated complaints Areas
where illegal dumping or apparently contaminated dis-
charges have been reported are obvious priority targets.
Geographic Information System (GIS) mapping can be
useful for visualizing complaint locations. These maps can
be overlain with other pertinent resource information (e.g.,
locations of facilities that have had compliance violations,
water quality data for receiving waters).
Locations identified from ambient water quality sampling
data The locations of high levels of particular contami-
nants (e.g., bacteria) can help to target priority outfalls.
Good resources for this information are the periodic water
quality assessment reports (“305(b) reports”) and lists of
impaired waters (“303(d) lists”) that the Clean Water Act requires each state to prepare
and submit to EPA. These reports are prepared by each state’s environmental agency
and are available to the public, often on the state’s Web site. Also, local watershed
groups monitor many water bodies, particularly those in more developed areas. In addi-
tion to providing sampling data, these groups can often serve as valuable resources for
information about a particular water body and potential problem areas. Other possible
sources of water quality data include local Boards of Health (in Massachusetts, they
must test at beaches) and water districts or departments.
CONDUCTING DRY-WEATHER OUTFALL/MANHOLE SURVEYS
Once your general geographic priority areas have been determined, dry-weather sur-
veys of outfalls and/or manholes can be undertaken to look for non-storm water flows.
EPA recommends that you make visual observations of outfalls during dry weather.
Some operators have found that dry-weather manhole inspections can also be useful.
The presence of flow in a storm sewer outfall or manhole during dry weather indicates
a likely illicit discharge. (Other explanations for the presence of such flow include infil-
trating ground water or the diversion of a surface stream into the storm sewer system.)
Because illicit discharges are often intermittent, you should ideally check for dis-
charges multiple times in a given location (particularly in a priority location). Please
note that only those with confined-space training should enter a manhole or outfall. The
observation and sampling strategies described below can typically be conducted with-
out entering manholes or outfalls.
In implementing your dry-weather survey, consider adopting the following strategies.
➤ Combine this survey with the outfall mapping field survey (see Chapter 2) and/or
water quality sampling of the discharges (discussed in the next section of this
chapter).
➤ Enlist a watershed association or other volunteer organization to help with the
outfall survey.
➤ Notify the public that the survey will be taking place (e.g., send notices to prop-
erty owners in the area). Note that while it is desirable to keep the public informed
IMPORTANT
NOTE:
Only those with
confined-space
training should enter 
a manhole or outfall.
<<PAGE 19>>
21
1
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing and Implementing an IDDE Plan: Locating Priority Areas4
about the presence of survey-takers to prevent undue alarm, notification may also
tip off an illegal discharger to curtail discharges; use your judgment as to the most
appropriate course of action. For example, you might just specify a very general
time frame during which the survey will take place.
➤ Keep safety considerations at the forefront of survey procedures at all times.
Likely hazards should be anticipated and discussed with the individuals carrying
out the survey, and individuals should be instructed to use their judgment and err
on the side of caution as they conduct the survey. The survey should be conduct-
ed in groups of two or more. If manholes are opened for inspection as part of the
survey, staff should wear high-visibility safety vests and block off their work area
with traffic cones; police presence can be helpful for safety and to allay public
concerns that can be created by individuals opening manholes. 
➤ Determine your criterion for “dry weather.” The working definition of dry weath-
er used for sampling programs can vary depending on location-specific factors.
Pitt et al. (1993) suggest that storm-runoff drainage ends in most urban areas no
more than 12 hours after a storm event, but many programs (e.g., Boston, NH
DES, San Diego) use a longer time period, such as no rain or no more than 1/10
inch of rain in the last 48 or 72 hours. 
➤ Observe dry-weather flows for odor, color, turbidity, and floatable matter.
Observe outfalls for deposits and stains, vegetation, and damage to outfall struc-
tures. This information can help identify contaminants present in the discharge
and/or the likely nature of the discharge (e.g., sanitary, industrial). Some of the
resources listed in Chapter 10 provide examples of data and observation sheets to
be filled out for each outfall.
➤ Look up some of the resources listed in the references for this chapter for more
detailed instructions for conducting dry-weather field surveys (e.g., MA
DFWELE, 2002).
CASE STUDY: BOSTON WATER AND SEWER COMMISSION
USING SANDBAGS TO DETECT ILLICIT DISCHARGES
The Boston Water and Sewer Commission has had success using sandbags to help detect illicit discharges.
Sandbags are placed in storm drain outlets that empty into manholes and/or water bodies. The sandbags are
small enough that they do not block the storm drain outlet. They must be placed in the outlet after 48 hours of
dry weather (1/10 inch of rain or less). After the bag is placed in the outlet, another 48 hours of dry weather is
needed (total of 96 hours of dry weather). The outlet is then observed, and any water buildup behind the sand-
bag is sampled. This method is very effective in narrowing down the manhole junctures that contain illicit dis-
charges. Sandbags cost approximately $60 each and can be reused. The main difficulty in using this method
is the need for 96-hour periods of dry weather.
Information from an interview with Paul Barden, Deputy Director of Engineering Services, and Charlie Jewell, Project Director,
Boston Water and Sewer Commission, August 15, 2002.
<<PAGE 20>>
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing and Implementing an IDDE Plan: Locating Priority Areas
22
4
CONDUCTING WATER QUALITY TESTS
When dry-weather flow is observed, visual or odor observations
(e.g., observation of pieces of toilet paper, strongly colored or
very muddy discharge, or the odor of sewage or chemicals) may
provide enough information to determine that the discharge is
illicit and to identify the likely source. If not, water quality sam-
pling can be used to determine whether the flow is likely to have
resulted from an illicit discharge. 
Certain water quality parameters can serve as indicators of the
likely presence or absence of a specific type of discharge. Some
of these parameters can be measured in the field with probes or
test kits; others must be analyzed for in the laboratory. A wide
variety of water quality parameters can be measured in an IDDE
program, and many references exist that describe these parame-
ters. Some of the more commonly used and useful parameters are
summarized in Table 1, which focuses on parameters suggested
in Pitt et al. (1993) and the subset of those recommended in EPA’s
Phase II regulations. 
CASE STUDY: WINOOSKI, VERMONT
USE OF OPTICAL BRIGHTENERS
The city of Winooski, Vermont has found that testing for optical brighteners is an efficient, cheap way to deter-
mine the presence of a non-storm water discharge in a particular outfall. Optical brighteners are used in laun-
dry detergents and thus serve as a marker for household or commercial laundry discharges. These tests are
extremely sensitive to the presence of detergents. 
To perform an optical-brightener test, an untreated cotton pad ($9/100 pads) surrounded by a mesh bag or a
suet cage is placed in a storm drain outlet, manhole, or catch basin that has been found to have dry-weather
discharge and left for a certain period of time (i.e., 5-7 days). The cotton pad is then brought back to the lab
and placed under a UV lamp (approximately $200) in a dark room. A blue color indicates the presence of deter-
gents, signifying either illegal dumping, a direct illicit connection, a leaking sewer, or leakage from a failed
septic system. If the test is positive for detergents, further tests need to be performed to determine the source.
Information from an interview with Tim Grover, Water Pollution Control Facility Superintendent, City of Winooski, August 9, 2002.

<<PAGE 21>>
23
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing and Implementing an IDDE Plan: Locating Priority Areas4
WATER QUALITY TEST PARAMETERS AND USES
Comments
- Pitt et al. 1993 suggested parameter; EPA Phase II
regulations recommended parameter
-T ypically measured in the field with a probe
- Pitt et al. 1993 suggested parameter; EPA Phase II
regulations recommended parameter
- Used very often and equipment is readily available;
Boston, MA uses a field test kit (see case example)
- Pitt et al. 1993 suggested parameter; EPA Phase II
regulations recommended parameter
- Boston, MA uses a field test kit (see case example)
- Pitt et al. 1993 suggested parameter; EPA Phase II
regulations recommended parameter
-T ypically measured in the field or lab with a probe
- Pitt et al. 1993 suggested parameter
- Measured in the field with a thermometer or probe
- Pitt et al. 1993 suggested parameter
- Pitt et al. 1993 suggested parameter
- Pitt et al. 1993 suggested parameter
- Pitt et al. 1993 suggested parameter
-Pitt et al. 1993 suggested parameter
-Used by City of Winooski, VT (see case example)
- Used by NHDES (see case example in chapter 5)
Water Quality Test
Conductivity
Ammonia
Surfactants
pH
Temperature
Hardness
Total Chlorine
Fluoride
Potassium
Optical Brighteners 
(Fluorescence) 
Bacteria (fecal 
coliform, E. coli, 
and/or enterococci)
Use of Water Quality Test
Used as an indicator of dissolved solids
High levels can be an indicator of the
presence of sanitary wastewater
Indicate the presence of detergent (e.g.,
laundry, car washing)
Extreme pH values (low or high) may
indicate commercial or industrial flows;
not useful in determining the presence
of sanitary wastewater (which, like
uncontaminated baseflows, tends to
have a neutral pH, i.e., close to 7)
Sanitary wastewater and industrial cool-
ing water can substantially influence
outfall discharge temperatures.  This
measurement is most useful during cold
weather.
Used to distinguish between natural and
treated waters
Used to indicate inflow from potable
water sources; not a good indicator of
sanitary wastewater because chlorine
will not exist in a "free" state in water for
long (it will combine with organic com-
pounds)
Used to indicate potable water sources
in areas where water supplies are fluori-
dated
High levels may indicate the presence of
sanitary wastewater
Used to indicate presence of laundry
detergents (which often contain fabric
whiteners, which cause substantial fluo-
rescence)
Used to indicate the presence of sani-
tary wastewater
TABLE 1
<<PAGE 22>>
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing and Implementing an IDDE Plan: Locating Priority Areas
24
4
REFERENCES: CHAPTER 4
Clark County (WA) Public Works. 2000. Illicit Discharge Screening Project: Annual Summary 2000.
http://www.co.clark.wa.us/site/clean/download/2000rept.pdf
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, Water Quality Control Division. October 2001.
Colorado’s Phase II Municipal Guidance: A guide to application requirements and program development
for coverage under Colorado’s Phase II municipal storm water discharge permit.
http://www.cdphe.state.co.us/wq/PermitsUnit/wqcdpmt.html
Donlon, A. 2001. 2000 Coastal Illicit Connection Remediation Grant Program: Final Report. New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and New Hampshire Estuaries Project. R-WD-01-10.
http://www.des.state.nh.us/wmb/was/nhep2000.pdf
Interview with Paul Barden and Charlie Jewell, BWSC, August 15, 2002.
Interview with Andrea Donlon, NHDES, July 29, 2002.
Interview with Tim Grover, City of Winooski, VT, August 9, 2002.
Jewell, C. 2001. A Systematic Methodology for Identification and Remediation of Illegal Connections.
Presented at the Water Environment Federation Specialty Conference 2001 A Collection Systems Odyssey:
Combining Wet Weather and O&M Solutions. http://www.wef.org
Massachusetts Division of Fisheries, Wildlife, and Environmental Law Enforcement. Storm Drain Mapping
Project Field Manual (Draft). January 2002. www.state.ma.us/dfwele/River/pdf/rivstormdrainmanual.pdf
North Central Texas Council of Governments. 2002. Storm Water Management in North Central Texas: Illicit
Discharge Detection and Elimination. http://www.dfwstormwater.com/Storm_Water_BMPs/illicit.html
Pitt, R., M. Lalor, R. Field, D.D. Adrian, and D. Barbe. 1993. Investigation of Inappropriate Pollutant Entries
into Storm Drainage Systems: A User’s Guide. USEPA Office of Research and Development. 
EPA/600/R-92/238. 
San Diego Stormwater Copermittees Jurisdictional Urban Runoff Management Program. 2001. Illicit
Connection/Illicit Discharge (IC/ID) Detection and Elimination Model Program Guidance. 
http://www.projectcleanwater.org/html/model_programs.html
Sargent, D. and W. Castonguay. 1998. An Optical Brightener Handbook.
http://www.mvpc.org/services_sec/mass_bays/optical_handbook.htm
Tuomari, D. 1999. Dos and Don’ts on Implementing a Successful Illicit Connection Program. 
Rouge River Demonstration Project. http://www.rougeriver.com/proddata 
USEPA. 1999. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System – Regulations for Revision of the Water
Pollution Control Program Addressing Storm Water Discharges; Final Rule. Federal Register Vol. 64 No.
235 (December 8, 1999), pp. 68722-68851.
USEPA. 2002. Storm Water Phase II Menu of BMPs - Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination: Identifying
Illicit Connections. http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/illi_2.cfm
<<PAGE 23>>
Once storm drain outlets with evidence of illicit
discharges have been located, various methods
can be used to pinpoint the exact source of the
discharge. These techniques, many of which are
already used by municipal sewer departments,
include manhole observation, video inspection,
smoke testing, dye testing, aerial infrared and
thermal photography, and tracking illegal
dumping.
MANHOLE OBSERVATIONS
A key tracing technique is to follow dry-weather
flows upstream along the conveyance system to
bracket the location of the source. This can be
accomplished by taking the following steps:
➤ Consult the drainage system map.
➤ Check the next “upstream” manhole with a junction to see if there is evidence of
discharge. You may wish to sample each manhole that has a discharge.
➤ Repeat these steps until a junction is found with no evidence of discharge; the dis-
charge source is likely to be located between the junction with no evidence of dis-
charge and the next downstream junction.
➤ Be aware of the surrounding areas and look for water in gutters and streets.
Note that the Boston Water and Sewer Commission has had success working in the oppo-
site direction (i.e., upstream to downstream) (Jewell 2001). Manhole observations can be
time-consuming, but they are generally a necessary step before conducting other tests.
25
DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING AN IDDE PLAN:
TRACING THE SOURCE  
OF AN ILLICIT DISCHARGE
5
Developing and implementing a plan to detect and address
illicit discharges is the third mandatory element of a Phase II
IDDE program. EPA recommends that the plan include the
following four components: (1) locating priority areas; 
(2) tracing the source of an illicit discharge; (3) removing the
source of an illicit discharge; and (4) program evaluation and
assessment. The second component, tracing the source of an
illicit discharge, is the subject of this chapter. 
THE IDDE PLAN
• Locating priority areas
➤ Tracing the source of an
illicit discharge 
• Removing the source of an
illicit discharge 
•P rogram evaluation and
assessment
A key tracing
technique is to follow
dry-weather flows
upstream along the
conveyance system to
bracket the location
of the source. 
<<PAGE 24>>
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing and Implementing an IDDE Plan: Tracing the Source of an Illicit Discharge
26
5
VIDEO INSPECTION
Mobile video cameras can be guided remotely through storm sewer lines to
observe possible illegal connections into storm sewer systems and record obser-
vations on a videocassette or DVD. Public works staff can observe the videos
and note any visible illegal connections. This technique is time-consuming and
expensive but thorough and usually definitive, and it does not require the intru-
sion on members of the public that some of the other methods do.
SMOKE TESTING
This technique involves injecting non-toxic smoke into storm sewer lines and
then noting the emergence of smoke from sanitary sewer vents in illegally con-
nected buildings or from cracks and leaks in the storm sewer lines. The injection
is accomplished by placing a smoke bomb in the storm sewer manhole below
ground and forcing air in after it. Smoke-generating machines can also be used.
Test personnel should be stationed at points of suspected illegal connections or
cracks/leaks, noting any escape of smoke (indicating an illicit connection or damaged
storm sewer infrastructure). Prior to performing this test, it is necessary to inform build-
ing owners and occupants in the area in advance. It is also advisable to inform the
police and fire departments.
For a more thorough smoke-test program, the sanitary sewer lines can also be smoked.
For houses that do not emit smoke during either the sanitary sewer or the storm sewer
system tests, sewer gas may be venting inside, which is hazardous. Interviews with var-
ious IDDE program staff suggest that the smoke-test method is more effective in infil-
tration/inflow investigations of the sanitary sewer system than in detecting illegal con-
nections to the storm sewer system.
Smoke may cause minor irritation of respiratory passages; residents with respiratory
conditions should receive special attention to determine if it is safe for them to be pres-
ent for the testing. Smoke testing is typically used to survey an area all at once, in con-
trast to dye testing, which tests one building at a time.
DYE TESTING
This technique involves flushing non-toxic dye into toi-
lets and sinks and observing storm sewer and sanitary
sewer manholes and storm sewer outfalls for the pres-
ence of the dye. Prior to performing this test, it is nec-
essary to inform building owners and occupants in
advance and gain permission for entry. Local public
health and state water quality staff should also be noti-
fied so that they will be prepared to respond to citizens
calling about any dye observed in surface waters. 
To perform the test, you need a crew of two or more
people (ideally, all with two-way radios). One person is
inside the building; the others are stationed at the appro-
priate storm sewer and sanitary sewer manholes (which
Smoke testing
involves injecting
non-toxic smoke into
storm sewer lines
and then noting the
emergence of smoke
from sanitary sewer
vents in illegally
connected buildings
or from cracks and
leaks in the storm
sewer lines. 

<<PAGE 25>>
27
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing and Implementing an IDDE Plan: Tracing the Source of an Illicit Discharge5
should be opened) and/or outfalls. The inside person drops dye into a plumbing fixture
(i.e., toilet or sink) and runs a sufficient amount of water to move the dye through the
plumbing system. The inside person then radios to the outside crew that the dye has
been dropped, and the outside crew watches for the dye in the storm sewer and sanitary
sewer, recording the presence or absence of the dye.
The test is relatively quick (about 30 minutes per test), effective (results are usually
definitive), and cheap. Dye testing is best used when the likely source of an illicit dis-
charge has been narrowed down to a few specific houses or businesses.
AERIAL INFRARED AND THERMAL PHOTOGRAPHY
Aerial infrared and/or thermal photography can be used to locate illicit discharges from
outfalls and failing septic systems using temperature and vegetation as markers. This
technique requires knowledge of aerial photo interpretation. Using aerial infrared or
thermal photographs, do the following:
CASE STUDY: NEW HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES
LOCATING AND TRACING ILLICIT DISCHARGES IN NEW HAMPSHIRE COASTAL COMMUNITIES
In 1996, the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (NHDES) began a program of investigat-
ing and eliminating illicit connections to storm drainage systems in coastal communities to reduce bacterial
contamination in coastal waters. The following excerpt from the NHDES report on the first phase of the proj-
ect describes the process used to detect and trace illicit discharges.
Beginning in the summer of 1996, the coastal shorelines were surveyed by foot or canoe at low tide for poten-
tial pollution sources. All pipes, seeps, streams, and swales with flow were sampled for bacteria. In addition,
temperature was measured, and observations related to the condition of the pipe (stained or structurally dam-
aged), odor, evidence of untreated wastewater (e.g., toilet paper), turbidity, color, debris, estimated flow, and
any other observations were noted. Dry pipes were rechecked on several occasions for intermittent flow.
Evidence indicating the presence of wastewater and/or elevated bacteria levels prompted further investiga-
tion of these locations.
Upstream catch basins and manholes associated with the outfall pipes that were identified by the screening
process were surveyed for evidence of wastewater and sampled for bacteria. Smoke testing (using non-toxic
smoke blown into catch basins) was then used to identify buildings connected to the storm drainage system
by canvassing the neighborhood for vents emitting smoke. Final confirmation of an illicit connection from the
buildings that emitted smoke was accomplished by dye testing indoor plumbing and observing the storm
drainage and sewer systems for the presence or absence of the dye.
Feeder streams were surveyed for outfall pipes with dry-weather flow. Other potential bacteriological sources
(e.g., pigeon roosting sites on bridges) were bracketed with water quality sampling stations. Where contami-
nated seeps and swales were suspected, the drainage area was surveyed for potential sources, such as bro-
ken sewer mains.
Landry, N. 1999. Elimination of Illicit Connections in Coastal New Hampshire Spurs Cooperation and Controversy: A Final Report
to the New Hampshire Estuaries Project. New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.
<<PAGE 26>>
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing and Implementing an IDDE Plan: Tracing the Source of an Illicit Discharge
28
5
➤ For outfalls
• Note if discharge has a higher temperature than that of the stream
• Note if algae growth is concentrated near an outfall
➤ For potentially failing septic systems
• Note evidence of increased moisture in surrounding soil
• Observe vegetation located close to the potentially failing septic system, and
note any increase in vegetation compared to the surrounding area
• Observe any increase in temperature readings at the septic system location
This is still a developing technology and not commonly used for IDDE programs. You
may still need further tests to determine specific houses/businesses with illegal con-
nections. This technique has been used primarily for the detection of failing septic sys-
tems, which are only considered “illicit discharges” under the Phase II Storm Water
program if they discharge into the storm sewer system.
TRACKING ILLEGAL DUMPING
Developing a coordinated system for collecting and tracking reports of illegal dumping
can help pinpoint this difficult-to-find source of illicit discharges. Suggestions for
tracking illegal dumping include the following:
➤ Create a hotline that can be used to report any illegal-dumping behavior (i.e., who
illegally dumped and where illegal dumping occurred).
➤ Observe the materials that have been illegally dumped and trace the potential
sources of the materials.
➤ Note where dumping occurs most often, record patterns of time of day and day of
the week, and note common responsible parties.
Challenges in addressing illegal dumping include the difficulty of catching dumpers in
the act and the significant staff time needed to receive, respond to, and track com-
plaints.
Aerial infrared
and/or thermal
photography can be
used to locate illicit
discharges from
outfalls and failing
septic systems using
temperature and
vegetation as
markers. 
Developing a
coordinated system
for collecting and
tracking reports of
illegal dumping can
help pinpoint this
difficult-to-find
source of illicit
discharges.
<<PAGE 27>>
29
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing and Implementing an IDDE Plan: Tracing the Source of an Illicit Discharge5
REFERENCES: CHAPTER 5
Center for Watershed Protection. Pollution Prevention Fact Sheet: Illegal Dumping Control. 
http://www.stormwatercenter.net/Pollution_Prevention_Factsheets/IllegalDumpingControl.htm
City of Cambridge, MA. 2002. Cambridge Sewer and Stormwater Line Inspection and Testing Program.
http://www.ci.cambridge.ma.us/~TheWorks/dye.html
Jewell, C. 2001. A Systematic Methodology for Identification and Remediation of Illegal Connections.
Presented at the Water Environment Federation Specialty Conference 2001 A Collection Systems Odyssey:
Combining Wet Weather and O&M Solutions. http://www.wef.org
Johnson, B. and D. Tuomari. 1998. Did you know…The Impact of On-site Sewage Systems and Illicit
Discharges on the Rouge River. Rouge River Demonstration Project. 
http://www.rougeriver.com/proddata 
Pierce County (WA) Public Works and Utilities. 2002. BMP S.1: Eliminate Illicit Storm Drain Connections.
http://www.co.pierce.wa.us/pc/services/home/environ/water/swm/sppman/bmps1.htm
San Diego Stormwater Copermittees Jurisdictional Urban Runoff Management Program. 2001. Illicit
Connection/Illicit Discharge (IC/ID) Detection and Elimination Model Program Guidance. 
http://www.projectcleanwater.org/html/model_programs.html
Town of Cary, NC. 2002. Town of Cary Smoke Test. http://www.townofcary.org/smoke
Tuomari, D. 1999. Dos and Don’ts on Implementing a Successful Illicit Connection Program. 
Rouge River Demonstration Project. http://www.rougeriver.com/proddata 
USEPA. 2002. Storm Water Phase II Menu of BMPs - Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination: Failing
Septic Systems. http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/illi_1.cfm
USEPA. 2002. Storm Water Phase II Menu of BMPs - Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination: Identifying
Illicit Connections. http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/illi_2.cfm
USEPA. 2002. Storm Water Phase II Menu of BMPs - Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination: Illegal
Dumping. http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/illi_3.cfm
USEPA Region 5. 1998. Illegal Dumping Prevention Guidebook. EPA905-B-97-001. Waste, Pesticides, and
Toxics Division, Chicago, Illinois. http://www.epa.gov/reg5rcra/wptdiv/illegal_dumping/
<<PAGE 28>>
This page is intentionally blank.
<<PAGE 29>>
Because there are various sources of illicit
discharges to the storm sewer system, there are
different kinds of actions municipalities may have
to take to remove those sources and prevent
future illicit discharges. This section groups those
actions into three categories: compliance
assistance and enforcement for illegal
connections to homes and businesses; proper
construction and maintenance of MS4s; and
responding to and preventing illegal dumping.
COMPLIANCE ASSISTANCE AND
ENFORCEMENT FOR ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS
TO HOMES AND BUSINESSES
There is a range of ways in which municipalities may wish to handle the removal of
illegal connections between homes or businesses and the storm sewer system.
Enforcement measures should be spelled out in the required IDDE ordinance (see
Chapter 3), but the MS4 operator will normally be allowed to use judgment about what
mix of compliance assistance and enforcement actions is appropriate in a given situa-
tion. Typically, a municipality responds to the discovery of an illegal connection in a
graduated manner, beginning with efforts to obtain voluntary compliance and escalat-
ing to increasingly severe enforcement actions if compliance is not obtained.
Voluntary Compliance
Often, home or business owners are not aware of the existence of illegal connections
between their buildings and the storm sewer systems. In these cases, providing the
responsible party with information about the connection, its environmental conse-
quences, the applicable regulations, and how to remedy it may be enough to secure vol-
31
DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING AN IDDE PLAN:
REMOVING THE SOURCE OF AN 
ILLICIT DISCHARGE
6
Developing and implementing a plan to detect and address
illicit discharges is the third mandatory element of a Phase II
IDDE program. EPA recommends that the plan include the
following four components: (1) locating priority areas; (2)
tracing the source of an illicit discharge; (3) removing the
source of an illicit discharge; and (4) program evaluation and
assessment. The third component, removing the source of an
illicit discharge, is the subject of this chapter.
THE IDDE PLAN
• Locating priority areas
•T racing the source of an
illicit discharge 
➤ Removing the source of an
illicit discharge 
•P rogram evaluation and
assessment

<<PAGE 30>>
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing and Implementing an IDDE Plan: Removing the Source of an Illicit Discharge6
untary compliance. The cost of removing the connection and reconnecting it to the san-
itary sewer system can be an obstacle. Recognizing this, some localities (e.g., Boston
and coastal New Hampshire) have chosen to provide assistance with these costs, using
municipal public works funds or state or federal grants.
Enforcement
EPA’s model illicit discharge ordinance (Appendix A) provides an example of the
enforcement steps that might be specified in a typical local ordinance. These steps are
summarized below.
➤ The authorized enforcement agency sends the property owner a Notice of
Violation (NOV), which may require the violator to take steps such as monitor-
ing, elimination of an illicit connection or discharge, or payment of a fine.
➤ The person receiving the NOV may appeal it.
➤ If the person receiving the NOV does not appeal or loses the appeal and fails to
correct the violation, the enforcement agency may “take any and all measures
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property.” The agency then may
require reimbursement from the violator for the cost of the abatement, including
administrative costs.
➤ The authorized enforcement agency also has the ability to seek an injunction
against the violator “restraining the person from activities which would create fur-
ther violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of
the violation.”
If the municipality has not yet obtained enforcement authority (e.g., because a local
ordinance has not yet been passed), it may be possible for the municipality to seek
enforcement action from state or federal authorities. Involvement of state or federal
CASE STUDY: WAYNE COUNTY, MICHIGAN
ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE
Wayne County, Michigan, began its illicit discharge detection and elimination program by targeting certain
industrial and commercial facilities for site inspections—starting at the other end of the pipe from the outfall
survey approach. County personnel visited the facilities, dye tested a representative number of plumbing fix-
tures, and observed general “housekeeping” practices.
If no violations were found, a thank you letter was sent to the facility acknowledging staff participation and
closing the file. If a facility was found to have an illicit connection, a violation letter was sent, giving the facil-
ity 30 to 90 days to correct it. If a facility failed to comply with the request, the municipal plumbing inspector
or building department became involved. If the municipality was not able to gain compliance, the facility was
referred to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. When an illicit connection was eliminated, the
county provided confirmation. Once a correction was confirmed, a confirmation/thank you letter was sent to
facility management, thanking them for their participation and closing the file.
Information from Tuomari, D. 1999. Dos and Don’ts on Implementing a Successful Illicit Connection Program. Technical Report of
the Rouge River Demonstration Project. http://www.rougeriver.com/proddata 
Typically, a
municipality responds
to the discovery of an
illegal connection in
a graduated manner,
beginning with efforts
to obtain voluntary
compliance and
escalating to
increasingly severe
enforcement actions
if compliance is not
obtained.
32
<<PAGE 31>>
33
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing and Implementing an IDDE Plan: Removing the Source of an Illicit Discharge6
authorities may also be necessary if the source of an illicit discharge is located outside
of the municipality’s boundaries. Examples of enforcement procedures implemented in
Wayne County, Michigan, and St. Louis, Missouri, are included in this section.
PROPER CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF MS4s
Some illicit discharge problems may be the responsibility of the MS4 operator. These
problems include cross-connections between the sanitary sewer and storm sewer sys-
tems and infiltration into damaged or deteriorating storm sewer pipes. 
Cross-connections between a municipality’s sanitary
sewer and storm sewer systems may exist by mistake,
because of deterioration over time, or as part of the
design in an antiquated system. Complete and accurate
maps of the sewer and storm sewer systems can help
identify these cross-connections and prevent them during
any new construction that takes place. 
Contamination can infiltrate into a cracked or leaking
MS4 from leaking sanitary sewer pipes, failing septic
systems, or contaminated groundwater. To help prevent
this, both MS4s and sanitary sewer systems should be
inspected periodically and maintained properly to keep
them in good repair.
CASE STUDY: ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI
ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE
The Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District has a comprehensive ordinance regulating users who discharge
into the sanitary sewer and storm sewer systems. Upon discovery of a violation of this ordinance, the Sewer
District notifies the user of the nature of the violation and directs that actions be taken to remedy the non-
compliance. Within 30 days of receipt of the notice, the user must submit a plan for correction of the violation
to the Sewer District. If a violation is found within the house or business that appears to present an immedi-
ate danger to human health or welfare, a verbal notification is given immediately by telephone or visit, direct-
ing the user to take immediate action to discontinue or reduce the discharge to safe levels. A written notice
is sent within five days of the verbal notification. 
The Sewer District has the power to issue the following Administrative Orders: Cease and Desist Order (direct-
ing the user to stop the violating action), Compliance Order (directing the user take action to correct violation),
Show Cause Order (directing the user to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be
taken), and Consent Order (establishing an agreement with a user to correct a violation).
If the violator does not take action within the time allotted, the Sewer District has the right to eliminate the illic-
it discharge at the expense of the violator. Legal actions can be taken against, and penalties imposed on, any
violator that does not comply. 
Information from Metropolitan St. Louis Sewer District Ordinance No. 8472, on EPA’s nonpoint source pollution Web site at
http://www.epa.gov/owow/nps/ordinance/discharges.htm

<<PAGE 32>>
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing and Implementing an IDDE Plan: Removing the Source of an Illicit Discharge
34
6
PREVENTING AND RESPONDING TO ILLEGAL DUMPING
It is often difficult to identify and locate the individuals responsible
for illegal dumping; therefore, a program to address illegal dump-
ing should focus on prevention, backed up by enforcement to the
extent possible.
EPA Region 5 has prepared an Illegal Dumping Prevention
Guidebook that suggests the following key strategies that can be
used to prevent illegal dumping.
➤ Site maintenance and controls Measures should be taken to
clean up areas where illegal dumping has taken place, and
controls such as signs or access restrictions should be used, as
appropriate, to prevent further dumping.
➤ Community outreach and involvement Outreach is the linch-
pin of an illegal-dumping prevention program and can include
the following components:
• Educating businesses, municipal employees, and the gener-
al public about the environmental and legal consequences
of illegally disposing of waste into the storm sewer system
• Providing and publicizing ways for citizens to properly dispose of waste
• Providing opportunities for citizens to get involved in preventing and reporting
illegal dumping
➤ Targeted enforcement This strategy should include a prohibition against illegal
dumping via ordinance or another similar measure, backed up by trained law-
enforcement personnel and possibly field operations.
➤ Program measurement Tracking and evaluation methods should be used to meas-
ure the impact of illegal-dumping prevention efforts and determine whether goals
are being met.
Although the EPA Region 5 guidebook is targeted more to land dumping of solid waste,
these strategies can also be applied to illegal dumping into the storm drain system.
Some specific methods that municipalities can use to implement these strategies
include the following:
➤ Site maintenance and controls
• Storm-drain stenciling program
• Spill-response plans for hazardous-waste spills
➤ Community outreach and involvement
• An illegal-dumping reporting hotline
• Outreach to business sectors that handle hazardous materials and/or have a his-
tory of illegal-dumping problems; outreach should include information on Best
Management Practices for spill prevention and proper waste disposal

<<PAGE 33>>
35
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing and Implementing an IDDE Plan: Removing the Source of an Illicit Discharge6
• Printed outreach materials for the public
• Publicizing of waste-disposal options, such as used oil recycling and household
hazardous waste collections
➤ Targeted enforcement
• An illegal-dumping ordinance (or section of IDDE ordinance)
• Surveillance of known illegal-dumping locations
• Business facility inspections
•T raining of municipal employees, police officers, and other local entities to be
on lookout
➤ Program measurement
•T racking of incident locations
• Compilation of statistics (e.g., annual cleanup costs, facility compliance,
arrests, convictions, fines, complaints)
REFERENCES: CHAPTER 6
California Coastal Commission. 2002. Model Urban Runoff Program: A How-To Guide for Developing Urban
Runoff Programs for Small Municipalities. http://www.coastal.ca.gov/la/murp.html
Center for Watershed Protection. Pollution Prevention Fact Sheet: Illegal Dumping Control. 
http://www.stormwatercenter.net/Pollution_Prevention_Factsheets/IllegalDumpingControl.htm
Interview with Paul Barden and Charlie Jewell, BWSC, August 15, 2002.
Interview with Andrea Donlon, NHDES, July 29, 2002.
North Central Texas Council of Governments. 2002. Storm Water Management in North Central Texas: Illicit
Discharge Detection and Elimination. http://www.dfwstormwater.com/Storm_Water_BMPs/illicit.html
San Diego Stormwater Copermittees Jurisdictional Urban Runoff Management Program. 2001. Illicit
Connection/Illicit Discharge (IC/ID) Detection and Elimination Model Program Guidance. 
http://www.projectcleanwater.org/html/model_programs.html
USEPA. 1997. Guidance Manual for Implementing Municipal Storm Water Management Programs – Volume
1: Planning and Administration (Draft). Office of Wastewater Management and Office of Research and
Development. http://www.epa.gov/npdes/pubs/owm0233.pdf
USEPA. 1999. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System – Regulations for Revision of the Water
Pollution Control Program Addressing Storm Water Discharges; Final Rule. Federal Register Vol. 64 No.
235 (December 8, 1999), pp. 68722-68851. http://www.epa.gov/npdes/regulations/phase2.pdf
USEPA. 2002. Storm Water Phase II Menu of BMPs -  Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination: Illegal
Dumping. http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/illi_3.cfm
USEPA. 2002. Model Ordinances to Protect Local Resources: Illicit Discharges.
http://www.epa.gov/owow/nps/ordinance/discharges.htm
<<PAGE 34>>
This page is intentionally blank.
<<PAGE 35>>
EPA recommends that the IDDE plan include procedures for program
evaluation and assessment. Program evaluation is the time to step back,
look at what has been done, determine what worked and what didn’t, and
make adjustments to planned future actions as appropriate. In this final
component of your IDDE plan, you outline how you will go about
evaluating your program.
EVALUATION STRATEGY
Evaluation procedures should include documentation of actions taken to
locate and eliminate illicit discharges. Such documentation might include
numbers of outfalls screened, complaints taken and investigated, feet of
storm sewers videotaped, numbers of discharges eliminated, or number of
dye or smoke tests conducted. Note that this component of the IDDE plan
fits in with the overall Phase II requirements for identifying measurable
goals for each Best Management Practice (BMP) and reporting on progress toward
achieving those goals. (Chapter 9 discusses BMPs and measurable goals in more
detail.) Annual reports are necessary during the first permit term (typically five years),
and in years two and four in subsequent terms. (For more information on reporting
requirements, see EPA’s Fact Sheet 2.9.)
Determining the impact of these actions is more of a challenge, but it is an important
part of the overall process because EPA allows for adjustments to the storm water man-
agement program over the life of the permit. Assessment of what worked and what
didn’t provides the information needed to make these adjustments to your IDDE pro-
gram. EPA’s Phase II regulations do not specify exactly how to evaluate your IDDE
program, so check whether your permitting authority has made any particular specifi-
cations, and brainstorm from there. 
37
DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING AN IDDE PLAN: 
EVALUATION OF THE IDDE PROGRAM7
Developing and implementing a plan to detect and address
illicit discharges is the third mandatory element of a Phase II
IDDE program. EPA recommends that the plan include the
following four components: (1) locating priority areas; (2) trac-
ing the source of an illicit discharge; (3) removing the source
of an illicit discharge; and (4) program evaluation and assess-
ment. The fourth component, program evaluation and assess-
ment, is the subject of this chapter.
THE IDDE PLAN
• Locating priority areas
•T racing the source of an
illicit discharge 
• Removing the source of an
illicit discharge 
➤ Program evaluation and
assessment
Evaluation
procedures should
include
documentation of
actions taken to
locate and eliminate
illicit discharges.  
IDDE ACTIONS TAKEN
  75  Outfalls screened
  19__ Complaints investigated
     __ Dye tests conducted
     __ Discharges eliminated
<<PAGE 36>>
IDDE MANUAL 
Developing and Implementing an IDDE Plan: Evaluation of the IDDE Program
38
7
Here are few suggestions for assessing the effectiveness of various IDDE strategies:
➤ Evaluate the number of possible illicit discharges that were detected using differ-
ent detection methods. This can help you determine which detection methods are
most effective.
➤ Evaluate the number of discharges and/or quantity of discharges eliminated using
different possible enforcement and compliance measures.
➤ If you have access to monitoring data for receiving waters, evaluate changes in
the water quality of receiving waters.
➤ Program evaluation might also include procedures for considering efficiency and
feasibility. Questions you might want to ask include:
• How much staff time and expense did it take to achieve a given result?
•W ere practical difficulties encountered with this approach? What were they,
and how much of a problem did they present?
The strategies listed above are only suggestions. Because you are allowed a great deal
of flexibility in determining what procedures you will use for program evaluation and
assessment, you can decide what procedures will be most helpful in providing the infor-
mation that you will need to move forward with your IDDE program.
REFERENCES: CHAPTER 7
USEPA. 1999. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System – Regulations for Revision of the Water
Pollution Control Program Addressing Storm Water Discharges; Final Rule. Federal Register Vol. 64 No.
235 (December 8, 1999), pp. 68722-68851. http://www.epa.gov/npdes/regulations/phase2.pdf
USEPA. 2000. EPA Storm Water Phase II Final Rule Fact Sheet 2.9: Permitting and Reporting: The Process
and Requirements. EPA 833-F-011. January 2000. http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/swfinal.cfm
USEPA New England. 2002. NPDES General Permit for Storm Water Discharges from Regulated Small
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) (Draft). September 27, 2002.
http://www.epa.gov/region01/npdes/ms4.html
<<PAGE 37>>
39
OUTREACH TO EMPLOYEES, BUSINESSES, 
AND THE GENERAL PUBLIC8
The fourth mandatory element of an IDDE program
calls for the MS4 operator to “inform public
employees, businesses, and the general public of
hazards associated with illegal discharges and
improper disposal of waste.” As noted in the
Introduction, the requirement for public education
and outreach on storm water impacts is also one of
the six minimum control measures in the storm
water management program. Therefore, fulfilling
the outreach requirement for IDDE helps the MS4 to
comply with this mandatory element; IDDE
outreach can be integrated into the broader storm
water outreach program.
Some suggestions for conducting IDDE outreach to the different community sectors are presented below. Many
examples of storm water outreach materials, including some that are intended to be modified and used by
anyone, are available on the Web; some useful Web sites are listed in Chapter 10. Operators of regulated small
MS4s may want to work together with other operators in their area in developing outreach materials and
campaigns to share ideas and save money.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES
While it is clear that public works employees should receive specific technical training
on the requirements of the IDDE program and the techniques that will be used to carry
it out, other municipal departments should also be targeted for training. 
A training program for municipal employees on pollution prevention techniques is
required under the “Pollution Prevention/Good Housekeeping for Municipal
Operations” minimum control measure. Preventing non-storm water discharges into the
storm sewer system from municipal operations can be one part of this training. 
Many public employees can play an important role as partners in the detection and/or
prevention of illicit discharges. For example, highway department staff who maintain
catch basins can look for signs of illicit discharges. Municipal building inspectors can
help ensure that illegal connections to the storm sewer system do not take place in con-
struction and renovation projects. Police officers, public works employees, and other
municipal staff whose jobs keep them outside and mobile can help spot illegal dumpers.
Fire and police department personnel who respond to hazardous material spills can help
keep these spills out of the storm sewer system and adjacent water bodies. 
Many public
employees can play
an important role as
partners in the
detection and/or
prevention of illicit
discharges.
<<PAGE 38>>
BUSINESSES
Most businesses are willing to comply with environmental requirements and take
proactive steps to prevent pollution if they understand the issues and the possible solu-
tions. Here are some steps you can take to reach out to businesses.
➤ Create a general brochure and presentation to inform businesses about the IDDE
program. This information can be presented and/or made available at Chamber of
Commerce meetings and other business forums.
➤ Conduct compliance assistance outreach (e.g., visits, group training, and/or print-
ed materials) for specific business types (e.g., auto repair shops, mobile carpet
cleaning, restaurants). 
➤ Provide contractors and developers with information on preventing illegal con-
nections (in coordination with training on construction and post-construction
storm water requirements).
GENERAL PUBLIC
There are many ways in which the general public can be made aware of environmental
issues and the things they can do to help mitigate or prevent problems. Here are some
things you can do to inform and involve the public.
➤ Work with citizen groups to conduct storm-drain stenciling (e.g., “Don’t Dump –
Drains to River”) and outfall surveys. 
• In conducting these activities, you should:
- Educate the groups about their activity (either informally or via a video or
other presentation)
- Make sure volunteers understand constraints associated with storm-drain
stenciling activities (e.g., heavy traffic use areas, historic districts)  
- Have volunteers sign liability forms, if necessary 
•Y ou may also wish to: 
- Publicize the activities through the media
- Give volunteers brochures to hand out to the public with who they interact 
- Repeat stenciling periodically (due to paint wear off), unless placards are
used—stenciling on curbs lasts longer than on street surfaces 
- See Chapter 10 for information on storm-drain stenciling resources
➤ Create a program to promote, publicize, and facilitate public reporting of illicit
connections or discharges (e.g., a hotline). Some considerations in running a hot-
line include:
• Callers should be able to at least leave a message at any time of day 
• It may be helpful to have the hotline staffed during business hours  
•A system should be created for monitoring the hotline so that staff can follow
up quickly on reports of discharges
IDDE MANUAL 
Outreach to Employees, Businesses, the General Public
40
8
Most businesses are
willing to comply
with environmental
requirements and
take proactive steps
to prevent pollution if
they understand the
issues and the
possible solutions. 
If made aware of
environmental issues,
the general public
can help mitigate or
prevent problems.
<<PAGE 39>>
• The municipality may wish to offer a small reward for callers that provide
information leading to the detection of an illicit discharge source
➤ Distribute (by mail and by making available at various locations and events) print-
ed outreach materials. A general flyer about illicit discharges might include infor-
mation on the following:
• Background information on water pollution
•A definition of what constitutes an illicit discharge
•M easures to prevent illicit discharges
• Information about the municipality’s illicit discharge ordinance
➤ Create Public Service Announcements for radio and/or television.
➤ Work with the local access cable station and local newspapers to develop features
on illicit discharge prevention.
➤ Create and publicize a household hazardous waste disposal/recycling program.
➤ Provide classroom speakers and/or printed information for schools.
41
IDDE MANUAL 
Outreach to Employees, Businesses, the General Public8
REFERENCES: CHAPTER 8
Chesterfield County (V A). Undated. Household Guide to Chesterfield County’s Illicit Discharge Ordinance.
http://www.chesterfield.gov/CommunityDevelopment/Engineering/HouseholdFactSheet.pdf
North Central Texas Council of Governments. 2002. Storm Water Management in North Central Texas: Illicit
Discharge Detection and Elimination. http://www.dfwstormwater.com/Storm_Water_BMPs/illicit.html
USEPA. 1999. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System – Regulations for Revision of the Water
Pollution Control Program Addressing Storm Water Discharges; Final Rule. Federal Register Vol. 64 No.
235 (December 8, 1999), pp. 68722-68851. http://www.epa.gov/npdes/regulations/phase2.pdf
USEPA. 2000. Storm Water Phase II Compliance Assistance Guide. EPA 833-R-00-002. Office of Water.
http://www.epa.gov/npdes/pubs/comguide.pdf
USEPA. 2000. EPA Storm Water Phase II Final Rule Fact Sheet 2.3: Public Education and Outreach
Minimum Control Measure. EPA 833-F-00-005. January 2000. 
http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/swfinal.cfm
USEPA. 2000. EPA Storm Water Phase II Final Rule Fact Sheet 2.8: Pollution Prevention/Good Housekeeping
Minimum Control Measure. EPA 833-F-00-010. January 2000. 
http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/swfinal.cfm
USEPA. 2002. Storm Water Phase II Menu of BMPs – Public Education and Outreach on Storm Water
Impacts. http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/pub_ed.cfm
USEPA. 2002. Storm Water Phase II Menu of BMPs – Public Education and Outreach on Storm Water
Impacts: Proper Disposal of Household Hazardous Wastes.
http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/edu_5.cfm
<<PAGE 40>>
This page is intentionally blank.
<<PAGE 41>>
43
BMPS AND MEASURABLE GOALS FOR IDDE9
As mentioned in the Introduction, operators of regulated
small MS4s generally must submit applications for
Phase II storm water general permits by March 10, 2003.
As part of their application, they must identify best
management practices (BMPs) that they will use to
comply with each of the six minimum control measures,
and the measurable goals that they will use to
demonstrate BMP implementation. Within the first
permit term, the operators have to fully implement their
storm water management programs.
GETTING STARTED
EPA allows MS4 operators a great deal of flexibility in determining what BMPs are
most appropriate for their storm water programs. The agency has developed the fol-
lowing materials to assist operators in identifying appropriate BMPs:
➤ A National Menu of Best Management Practices for Storm Water Phase II,which
includes a toolkit of example BMPs for each of the Phase II minimum control
measures (available on the Web)
➤ Measurable Goals Guidance for Small MS4s
➤ A Storm Water Phase II Compliance Guide, which offers examples of BMPs and
measurable goals for each of the six minimum measures
Others, including states, regional agencies, trade associations, and non-profit organiza-
tions have also developed BMP information.
A sample list of IDDE BMPs and measurable goals is presented below. This list draws
from BMP and measurable goal recommendations that have been offered by EPA and
others. The list has not been officially endorsed by EPA or state agencies; it is intend-
ed to serve as a starting point to help municipalities think about the BMPs and meas-
urable goals that are appropriate to their IDDE programs. BMPs are listed in bold, fol-
lowed by the measurable goals for each BMP. (The BMPs are organized according to
the four elements required in an IDDE program.) 
■STORM SEWER MAP
➤ Create a storm sewer map
• Map a certain percentage of outfalls (adding up to 100% by the end of the per-
mit term) or of the area of the town
EPA allows MS4
operators a great deal
of flexibility in
determining what
BMPs are most
appropriate for their
storm water
programs.
<<PAGE 42>>
44
1
■ORDINANCE
➤ Pass an illicit discharge ordinance
• Draft an IDDE ordinance (or storm water ordinance with IDDE component) or
an amendment to existing bylaws
• Pass an ordinance or amendment
■IDDE PLAN
➤ Prepare an IDDE plan
• Complete a final plan and obtain the signature of the person overseeing the
plan
➤ Conduct dry weather field screening of outfalls
• Screen a certain percentage of outfalls (adding up to 100% by the end of the
permit term)
➤ Trace the source of potential illicit discharges
•T race the source of a certain percentage of continuous flows (adding up to
100% by the end of the permit term)
•T race the source of a certain percentage of intermittent flows and illegal dump-
ing reports (100% may never be an achievable goal in this case)
➤ Eliminate illicit discharges
• Eliminate a certain number of discharges and/or a certain volume of flow, or a
certain percentage of discharges whose source is identified (adding up to 100%
by the end of the permit term)
■OUTREACH
➤ Implement and publicize a household hazardous waste collection program 
• Hold a periodic (e.g., annual) hazardous waste collection day 
• Mail flyers about the hazardous waste collection program to all town resi-
dences
➤ Create and distribute an informational flyer for homeowners about IDDE 
• Mail the flyer to town residences
• Print the flyer as a doorknob hanger and have water-meter readers distribute it
➤ Create and distribute an informational flyer for businesses about IDDE 
• Mail the flyer to targeted businesses
➤ Work with community groups to stencil storm drains
• Stencil a certain percentage of drains
IDDE MANUAL 
BMPs and Measurable Goals for IDDE9
<<PAGE 43>>
➤ Create and publicize an illicit discharge reporting hotline 
• Put the hotline in place 
• Include an announcement of the hotline in sewer bills
• Follow up on all hotline reports within 48 hours
45
1
IDDE MANUAL 
BMPs and Measurable Goals for IDDE9
REFERENCES: CHAPTER 9
North Central Texas Council of Governments. 2002. Storm Water Management in North Central Texas: Illicit
Discharge Detection and Elimination. http://www.dfwstormwater.com/Storm_Water_BMPs/illicit.html
USEPA. 1999. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System – Regulations for Revision of the Water
Pollution Control Program Addressing Storm Water Discharges; Final Rule. Federal Register Vol. 64 No.
235 (December 8, 1999), pp. 68722-68851. http://www.epa.gov/npdes/regulations/phase2.pdf
USEPA. 2000. Storm Water Phase II Compliance Assistance Guide. EPA 833-R-00-002. Office of Water.
http://www.epa.gov/npdes/pubs/comguide.pdf
USEPA. 2000. EPA Storm Water Phase II Final Rule Fact Sheet 2.9: Permitting and Reporting: The Process
and Requirements. EPA 833-F-011. January 2000. http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/swfinal.cfm
USEPA. 2002. National Menu of Best Management Practices for Storm Water Phase II.
http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/menu.cfm
USEPA. 2002. Measurable Goals Guidance for Phase II Small MS4s.
http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/measurablegoals/index.cfm
<<PAGE 44>>
This page is intentionally blank.
<<PAGE 45>>
47
WEB SITES AND PUBLICATIONS
Key Information Available on EPA’s Storm Water Web Site 
Entry Point and General Information
http://www.epa.gov/npdes
➔ click on “Storm Water”
➔ click on “Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems” or “Phase II”
Storm Water Phase II Final Rule
http://www.epa.gov/npdes/regulations/phase2.pdf
IDDE section of the Phase II Final Rule: see section II(H)(3)(b)(iii), pp. 68756-68758.
EPA’s Fact Sheet Series
http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/swfinal.cfm
Overview
1.0 Storm Water Phase II Final Rule: An Overview
Small MS4 Program
2.0 Small MS4 Storm Water Program Overview
2.1 Who’s Covered? Designation and Waivers of Small Regulated MS4s
2.2 Urbanized Areas: Definition and Description
Minimum Control Measures
2.3 Public Education and Outreach
2.4 Public Participation/Involvement
2.5 Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination
2.6 Construction Site Runoff Control
2.7 Post-Construction Runoff Control
2.8 Pollution Prevention/Good Housekeeping
2.9 Permitting and Reporting: The Process and Requirements
2.10 Federal and State-Operated MS4s: Program Implementation
Construction Program
3.0 Construction Program Overview
3.1 Construction Rainfall Erosivity Waiver
Industrial “No Exposure”
4.0 Conditional No Exposure Exclusion for Industrial Activity
Documents
Storm Water Phase II Compliance Assistance Guide
http://www.epa.gov/npdes/pubs/comguide.pdf
National Menu of BMPs for Storm Water Phase II
http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/menu.cfm
RESOURCES10
<<PAGE 46>>
48
1
Measurable Goals Guidance for Phase II Small MS4s
http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/measurablegoals/index.cfm
Storm Water Web Sites
The Rouge River National Wet Weather Demonstration Project
http://www.rougeriver.com
(See specific information on IDDE at http://www.rougeriver.com/techtop/illicit/overview.html .)
Center for Watershed Protection’s Storm Water Manager’s Resource Center
http://www.stormwatercenter.net
The University of Tennessee’s Municipal Technical Advisory Service NPDES Phase II Storm Water
Management BMP Toolkit
http://www.mtas.utk.edu/bmptoolkit.htm
The Illicit Discharge section provides a number of useful web links and downloadable PDFs.
Organization Web Sites
Water Environment Federation
http://www.wef.org
American Public Works Association
http://www.apwa.net
Local Government Environmental Assistance Network
http://www.lgean.org
Center for Watershed Protection
http://www.cwp.org
The Boston Water and Sewer Commission
(the Web site includes the BWSC’s regulations, outreach information, and other useful items)
http://www.bwsc.org
Storm Water Manuals
California Coastal Commission. 2002. Model Urban Runoff Program: A How-To Guide for Developing Urban
Runoff Programs for Small Municipalities. http://www.coastal.ca.gov/la/murp.html
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, Water Quality Control Division. October 2001.
Colorado’s Phase II Municipal Guidance: A guide to application requirements and program development for
coverage under Colorado’s Phase II municipal stormwater discharge permit.
http://www.cdphe.state.co.us/wq/PermitsUnit/wqcdpmt.html
IDDE Manuals
San Diego Stormwater Copermittees Jurisdictional Urban Runoff Management Program. 2001. Illicit
Connection/Illicit Discharge (IC/ID) Detection and Elimination Model Program Guidance. 
http://www.projectcleanwater.org/html/model_programs.html
IDDE MANUAL 
Resources10
<<PAGE 47>>
49
1
Pitt, R., M. Lalor, R. Field, D.D. Adrian, and D. Barbe. 1993. Investigation of Inappropriate Pollutant Entries
into Storm Drainage Systems: A User’s Guide. USEPA Office of Research and Development. EPA/600/R-
92/238. (Available on the Web via EPA’s National Environmental Publications Information System,
http://www.epa.gov/clariton.)
North Central Texas Council of Governments. 2002. Storm Water Management in North Central Texas: Illicit
Discharge Detection and Elimination.
http://www.dfwstormwater.com/Storm_Water_BMPs/illicit.html
Information on Specific Topics
Ordinances
USEPA’s Model Ordinances to Protect Local Resources: Illicit Discharges. 
http://www.epa.gov/owow/nps/ordinance/discharges.htm 
(The same information can be found at http://www.stormwatercenter.net.)
Boston Water and Sewer Commission’s Regulations Governing the Use of Sanitary and Combined Sewers and
Storm Drains. http://www.bwsc.org
The Massachusetts Citizen Planner Training Collaborative offers “Tips on Drafting Bylaws” for Massachusetts
municipalities: http://www.umass.edu/masscptc/Tips_on_Drafting.html
Optical Brighteners
Sargent, D. and W. Castonguay. 1998. An Optical Brightener Handbook. Available at:
http://www.mvpc.org/services_sec/mass_bays/optical_handbook.htm and
http://www.naturecompass.org/8tb/sampling/
Dye Testing
Dye supplier used by a reviewer of this manual: NORLAB, Inc., Amherst, OH. 1-800-247-9422; 
http://www.norlabdyes.com
Smoke Testing
Smoke testing equipment supplier used by a reviewer of this manual: Hurco Technologies, Inc., 1-800-888-1436;
http://www.hurcotech.com
Outfall/Manhole Surveys
Massachusetts Division of Fisheries, Wildlife, and Environmental Law Enforcement. Storm Drain Mapping
Project Field Manual (Draft). January 2002. http://www.state.ma.us/dfwele/River/pdf/rivstormdrainmanual.pdf
Jewell, C. 2001. A Systematic Methodology for Identification and Remediation of Illegal Connections. Presented
at the Water Environment Federation Specialty Conference 2001 A Collection Systems Odyssey: Combining Wet
Weather and O&M Solutions. (Available for purchase via the WEF Web site, http://www.wef.org.)
Outreach
• Household Hazardous Waste Collection
Household hazardous waste collection days in New Hampshire can be viewed online at
http://www.des.state.nh.us/hhw/hhwevent.htm. 
Environmental Depot, Burlington VT. http://www.cswd.net/facilities/hazardous_waste.shtml
IDDE MANUAL 
Resources10
<<PAGE 48>>
• Storm-Drain Stenciling
Earthwater Stencils, an organization that does storm drain stenciling: http://www.earthwater-stencils.com/
The Ocean Conservancy’s Storm Drain Sentries program has a goal of having volunteers stencil one mil-
lion storm drains with educational pollution prevention messages. The Ocean Conservancy supplies volun-
teers with a fact sheet about nonpoint source pollution, tips on conducting a stenciling project, and stencils
for volunteer organizations to use. In return, stenciling project leaders are asked to submit data about the
number of storm drains they stenciled, the types of pollutants found near the storm drains, and potential
pollutant sources. This information is added to a growing database maintained by the Ocean Conservancy.
Contact the Ocean Conservancy’s Office of Pollution Prevention and Monitoring at 757-496-0920 or 
stormdrain@oceanconservancyva.org. 
http://www.oceanconservancy.org/dynamic/getInvolved/events/sentries/sentries.htm
Resources for storm drain stenciling programs in New Hampshire:
- Coordinated by Julia Peterson of UNH-Cooperative Extension in the coastal watershed
http://ceinfo.unh.edu/Common/Documents/gsc5401.htm. Also described at
http://www.seagrant.unh.edu/extension.htm 
- Coordinated by the NH Coastal Program (part of the Office of State Planning)
http://www.state.nh.us/coastal/CoastalEducation/marinedebris.htm 
- Description of Manchester’s storm drain stenciling on EPA’s Web site describing the SEPP
http://www.epa.gov/region1/eco/csoman/sepp.html (See #1 and #6)
• Outreach Materials
EPA is preparing educational materials on different water topics each month as part of the year-long cele-
bration of the 30th anniversary of the Clean Water Act. April 2003 will be Storm Water Month. The public
education kit is expected to include:
- General Storm Water Awareness brochure
- Homeowner Guide (car washing, vehicle fluids changing, lawn & garden care, pet waste, 
septic system management)
- Small Construction Guide poster
- Press release
- Public service announcement for the radio
- Stickers
- Door hanger with illicit discharge message
- PowerPoint presentation
These items will be available for download or order on EPA’s Year of Clean Water Web site,
http://www.epa.gov/water/yearofcleanwater/month.html. Before the materials are available on the Web site,
you can contact EPA’s contractor, TetraTech, to be on the mailing list for the materials. 
Email Kathryn Phillips at tetratech1@earthlink.net or kathryn.phillips@tetratech-ffx.com.
IDDE MANUAL 
Resources
50
10
<<PAGE 49>>
CONTACTS
USEPA-New England is the NPDES permitting authority for Massachusetts and New Hampshire. The other five
NEIWPCC member states serve as NPDES permitting authorities for the storm water program. Contact
information below was taken from the EPA-New England Web site
http://www.epa.gov/region01/npdes/stormwater/administration.html, the EPA NPDES Web site
http://www.epa.gov/npdes, and the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Web site
http://www.dec.state.ny.us.
U.S. EPA 
EPA Region 1, New England
Regional Storm Water Coordinator
Thelma Murphy 617-918-1615; murphy.thelma@epa.gov
Regional Storm Water Assistance Team
Ann Herrick 617-918-1560; herrick.ann@epa.gov
Shelly Puleo 617-918-1545; puleo.shelly@epa.gov
Olga Vergara 617-918-1519, vergara.olga@epa.gov
Massachusetts Assistance
Dave Gray 617-918-1577; gray.davidj@epa.gov
EPA Region 2
Regional Storm Water Coordinator
Karen O’Brien 212-637-3717; obrien.karen@epa.gov
STATES
Connecticut
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection
Bureau of Water Management
Permitting, Enforcement, and Remediation Division
http://www.dep.state.ct.us
Contact: Chris Stone 860-424-3850; chris.stone@po.state.ct.us
Maine
Maine Department of Environmental Protection
Bureau of Land and Water Quality
http://www.state.me.us/dep/blwq/stormwtr/index.htm
Contact: David Ladd 207-287-5404; david.ladd@state.me.us
Massachusetts
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection
Division of Watershed Management
http://www.state.ma.us/dep/brp/stormwtr/stormhom.htm
Contacts: Ginny Scarlet 508-767-2797; ginny.scarlet@state.ma.us
Linda Domizio 508-849-4005; linda.domizio@state.ma.us
51
IDDE MANUAL 
Resources10
<<PAGE 50>>
New Hampshire
New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
Storm Water Fact Sheet: http://www.des.state.nh.us/factsheets/wwt/web-8.htm
Storm Water Web Site: http://www.des.state.nh.us/StormWater
Contacts: Jeff Andrews 603-271-2984
Public Information and Permitting Office 603-271-2975
New York
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
Division of Water
http://www.dec.state.ny.us/website/dow/mainpage.htm
Contact: Mike Rafferty 518-402-8094; mrraffer@gw.dec.state.ny.us
Rhode Island
Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management
Water Resources – Permitting
http://www.state.ri.us/dem/programs/benviron/water/permits/ripdes/stwater/index.htm
Contacts: Margarita Chatterton 401-222-4700 x7605; mchatter@dem.state.ri.us
Greg Goblick 401-222-4700 x7265; ggoblick@dem.state.ri.us
Vermont
Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation
Water Quality Division
http://www.anr.state.vt.us/dec/waterq/stormwater.htm
Contact: Peter LaFlamme 802-241-3765; petel@dec.anr.state.vt.us
IDDE MANUAL 
Resources
52
10
<<PAGE 51>>
Model Illicit Discharge and Connection
Stormwater Ordinance1
ORDINANCE NO. ______
SECTION 1. PURPOSE/INTENT.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of 
( ) through the regulation of non-storm water discharges to the storm
drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This ordinance establish-
es methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in
order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit
process.  The objectives of this ordinance are:
1)To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater
discharges by any user
(2) To prohibit Illicit Connections and Discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system
(3) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary
to ensure compliance with this ordinance
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following shall mean:
Authorized Enforcement Agency: employees or designees of the director of the municipal agency designated to
enforce this ordinance.
Best Management Practices (BMPs): schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house keep-
ing practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or
stormwater conveyance systems.  BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to
control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
Clean Water Act. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amend-
ments thereto.
Construction Activity. Activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits. Currently these include construction
projects resulting in land disturbance of 5 acres or more. Beginning in March 2003, NPDES Storm Water Phase II
permits will be required for construction projects resulting in land disturbance of 1 acre or more. Such activities
include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Hazardous Materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its
quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improper-
ly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
Illegal Discharge. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted
in Section X of this ordinance.
Illicit Connections. An illicit connection is defined as either of the following:
53
APPENDIX A
1 USEPA. 2002. Model Ordinances to Protect Local Resources: Illicit Discharges. http://www.epa.gov/owow/nps/ordinance/discharges.htm
<<PAGE 52>>
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the
storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the
storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previ-
ously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency or,
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has
not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
Industrial Activity. Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit. means a permit issued
by EPA (or by a State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-
wide basis.
Non-Storm Water Discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water.
Person. means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized
by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner’s agent.
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints,
varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that
same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances
and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent
sidewalks and parking strips.
Storm Drainage System. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including
but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains,
pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reser-
voirs, and other drainage structures.
Storm Water. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precip-
itation, and resulting from such precipitation.
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. A document which describes the Best Management Practices and activities
to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions
to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to Stormwater, Stormwater Conveyance Systems, and/or Receiving
Waters to the Maximum Extent Practicable. 
Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged from a facility.
SECTION 3. APPLICABILITY.
This ordinance shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undevel-
oped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
SECTION 4. RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
The [authorized enforcement agency] shall administer, imple-
ment, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized
enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the Director of the authorized enforcement agency to persons
or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
SECTION 5. SEVERABILITY.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or para-
graph of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this Ordinance.
IDDE MANUAL 
Appendix A: Model Illicit Discharge and Connection Stormwater Ordinance
54
<<PAGE 53>>
SECTION 6. ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance are minimum standards; therefore this
ordinance does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamina-
tion, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
SECTION 7. DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
Prohibition of Illegal Discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any
materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a
violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except
as described as follows: 
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this ordinance: water line
flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, ris-
ing ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foun-
dation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-
land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine), fire fighting activ-
ities, and any other water source not containing Pollutants.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect pub-
lic health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement
agency prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit,
waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the
Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that
written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
Prohibition of Illicit Connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system
is prohibited. 
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of
whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of con-
nection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage
to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
SECTION 8. SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.
Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations
The [authorized enforcement agency] may, without prior notice,
suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened dis-
charge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or wel-
fare of persons, or to the MS4 or Waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent
or minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
Suspension due to the Detection of Illicit Dischar ge
Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this ordinance may have their MS4 access terminated if such
55
IDDE MANUAL 
Appendix A: Model Illicit Discharge and Connection Stormwater Ordinance
<<PAGE 54>>
termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of
the proposed termination of its MS4 access.  The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a
reconsideration and hearing.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this Section,
without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
SECTION 9. INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply
with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the [authorized enforcement agency] prior to the allowing of dis-
charges to the MS4. 
SECTION 10. MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.
1. Applicability.
This section applies to all facilities that have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity, includ-
ing construction activity.
2. Access to Facilities.
(1) The [authorized enforcement agency] shall be permitted
to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this ordinance as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this ordinance.  If a discharger has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
(3) Facility operators shall allow the [authorized enforcement
agency] ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water,
and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
(3) The [authorized enforcement agency] shall have the right
to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforce-
ment agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility’s storm water discharge.
(4) The [authorized enforcement agency] has the right to
require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitor-
ing equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger
at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure
their accuracy. 
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sam-
pled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the
[authorized enforcement agency] and shall not be replaced.  The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the [authorized enforce-
ment agency] access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this ordi-
nance. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge storm water associat-
ed with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency rea-
sonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required
by this ordinance.
IDDE MANUAL 
Appendix A: Model Illicit Discharge and Connection Stormwater Ordinance
56
<<PAGE 55>>
(7) If the [authorized enforcement agency] has been refused
access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect
and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with
this ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of
the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any
court of competent jurisdiction. 
SECTION 11. REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM W ATER 
POLLUTANTS BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
[Authorized enforcement agency] will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices for any activi-
ty, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm
drain system, or waters of the U.S.  The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall pro-
vide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes
into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge,
may be required to implement, at said person’s expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent
the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to
the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section.  These BMPs shall be part
of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES
permit.
SECTION 12. W ATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person’s lessee, shall keep and main-
tain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the
owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such
structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
SECTION 13. NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or respon-
sible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of mate-
rials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm
drain system, or water of the U.S. said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment,
and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately
notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of
non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or fac-
simile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the [authorized enforcement agency] with-
in three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of
the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
SECTION 14. ENFORCEMENT.
1. Notice of Violation.
Whenever the [authorized enforcement agency] finds that a
57
IDDE MANUAL 
Appendix A: Model Illicit Discharge and Connection Stormwater Ordinance
<<PAGE 56>>
person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Ordinance, the authorized enforcement
agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require
without limitation: 
(a) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(b) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(c) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(d) The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any
affected property; and
(e) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
(f) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline
within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the
violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated gov-
ernmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
SECTION 15. APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency.
The notice of appeal must be received within days from the date of the Notice of Violation. Hearing on the appeal
before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the
notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final.
SECTION 16. ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or , in the
event of an appeal, within days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the author-
ized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject
private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to
allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
SECTION 17. COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
Within days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement,
including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the
assessment within days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of
the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a spe-
cial assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such viola-
tion. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of percent per annum
shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the st day following discovery of the violation. 
SECTION 18. INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this
Ordinance.  If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this ordinance, the authorized enforce-
ment agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which
would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
SECTION 19. COMPENSATORY ACTION.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this Ordinance, the authorized enforce-
ment agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, atten-
dance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
IDDE MANUAL 
Appendix A: Model Illicit Discharge and Connection Stormwater Ordinance
58
<<PAGE 57>>
SECTION 20. VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in vio-
lation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator’s expense, and/or a civil action
to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
SECTION 21. CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this ordinance shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the
fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of ______ dollars per violation per day and/or
imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed ____ days.
The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney’s fees court costs and other expenses associated with
enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
SECTION 22. REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable fed-
eral, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies. 
SECTION 23. ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE. 
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect __ days after its final passage and adoption. All prior ordinances
and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed.
PASSED AND ADOPTED this ____ day of ___________, 19__, by the following vote:
59
IDDE MANUAL 
Appendix A: Model Illicit Discharge and Connection Stormwater Ordinance
<<PAGE 58>>
