THE ROUGE RIVER NATIONAL WET WEATHER DEMONSTRATION PROJECT 
EIGHTEEN YEARS OF DOCUMENTED SUCCESS 
 
James W. Ridgway, PE 
Executive Director 
Alliance of the Rouge Communities 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The Rouge River National Wet Weather Demonstration Project (Rouge Project) was provided a 
unique opportunity to demonstrate that a watershed-wide approach to restoring and protecting an 
urban river system by using a cooperative, locally based approach to pollution control could 
restore a highly polluted urban river.  More importantly, they were given the funds to document 
their success. 
 
The Rouge Project took a more holistic approach and considered the impacts from all sources of 
pollution and use impairments in receiving waters by using known watershed management 
techniques. The traditional piecemeal approach of focusing only on sources of pollution or a 
group of sources had not achieved the desired results nor did it achieve the acceptance of the 
residents of the watershed. The Rouge Project demonstrated several very important elements of 
using the watershed management approach including the need to: analyze all of the various 
sources of stressors to the water quality problems in a watershed-physical, chemical and 
biological; establish a hierarchy of pollution sources in a watershed-point sources and nonpoint 
sources-based upon the adverse water quality impacts of those sources; and keep reinforcing, at a 
watershed level, the concept of prioritizing the control of those sources and the other stressors to 
get desired environmental protection; recognize it may take a long time to correct some of these 
pollution sources or other physical, chemical or biological stressors so it is important to prioritize 
the control programs to get the maximum environmental improvement as soon as possible; 
critically assess the cumulative watershed impacts to quantitatively assess the physical, chemical 
and biological processes and then fashion the watershed-based solutions to prevent treating the 
symptoms rather than effecting a cure.  
 
This Presentation includes summaries on millions of data points including chemical, biological 
and physical parameters that document the water quality benefits of the massive investment in 
the Rouge Project. 
 
KEY WORDS 
 
CSO control, SSO control, Lake Restoration, Streambank Stabilization, Urban Storm Water, 
Measures of Success 
 
<<PAGE 1>>
INTRODUCTION 
 
This paper was written for one reason alone – to encourage our federal legislators and 
appropriators to find a way to fund the restoration of urban rivers.  The Rouge River National 
Wet Weather Demonstration Project has proven that it can be done. The data has proven that 
Water Quality Standards can be achieved.  Documented increases in biodiversity have shown the 
remarkable recuperative abilities of a river. The American Academy of Environmental Engineers 
(AAEE) awarded the Rouge River Project its prestigious Superior Achievement Award in the 
Academy's Excellence in Environmental Engineering competition. And most importantly, the 
Federal Agencies, including the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Office of 
Inspector General (OIG) has recognized it as being cost effective.  
 
This paper documents the success that can be achieved when a community-driven, well-financed 
urban river restoration is performed.  It presents summaries of the data collected and analyzed, 
the priority projects that made the most difference, and the resulting institutional arrangement 
that keeps the communities working cooperatively. 
 
 
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE RESTORATION EFFORTS ON THE ROUGE RIVER 
 
The Rouge River Watershed covers 466 square miles of southeast Michigan and is home to more 
than 1.3 million people in parts of Oakland, Wayne and Washtenaw counties. The watershed’s 
48 communities comprise a diversity of land uses from the urbanized areas of Detroit, Livonia 
and Southfield to the developing areas of Troy, Canton Township and Novi, to the rural areas of 
Salem, Superior and Van Buren townships. 
 
Like most urban rivers, the Rouge River has 
experienced more than a century of bad environmental 
practices. As a result, there were many stretches that 
virtually never met the water quality standards.  These 
areas were devoid of an active fishery and the habitat to 
support one.  The water stank and the riparian property 
owners had turned their back on the resource. 
 
But that all changed. 
 
This report is a good news story.  It proves that with 
substantial federal, state, and local support, a river can 
be revitalized.  Yes, this took a great deal of money but 
it took much more.  It took a broad spectrum of 
stakeholders banding together to “do the right thing.” – 
and they did. 
 
But we cannot underestimate the importance of federal 
financial support.  The Rouge River National Wet Weather Demonstration Project received 
nearly $300 million in federal grant funds.  Yes it required over $300 million of local matching 
USEPA's Office of Inspector General (OIG) 
conducted a nationwide audit of the national 
CSO control program interviewing EPA 
headquarters personnel, three EPA Regions, 
eight states, 22 communities and others. Their 
final Evaluation Report, "Wastewater 
Management ‐ Controlling and Abating 
Combined Sewer Overflows" in August 2002 
stated: 
 "Rouge River Project a Blueprint for Success ‐
‐ The Rouge River National Wet Weather 
Demonstration in Michigan is an excellent 
example of how utilizing a watershed 
approach can help to achieve water quality 
goals more efficiently.” 
<<PAGE 2>>
funds but without this tremendous financial commitment the challenge was insurmountable. The 
cost of repairing the aging infrastructure was simply too high to be borne exclusively by the local 
units of government.  However, given this federal “windfall,” the communities found a way to 
make the match and they built the facilities that were required.  Some local elected officials told 
their constituents that “this is the largest financial commitment of my lifetime” yet they stood 
together and they got it done. 
 
And once the river began to show signs of recovery, many of the local residents, businesses and 
industries that had given the Rouge up for dead, began to invest the time, energy, and money 
required to improve the housekeeping on all of the land that drained to their river. 
 
The results are amazing. 
 
I began working on the Rouge River in 1975 preparing the first watershed plan under the 208 
program.  I was young enough to see the potential but wise enough to recognize the odds.  They 
were staggering. Since that time there have been several poorly financed attempts to restore the 
river.  There was usually enough money for the study but never enough to do the work 
recommended by the study.  
 
That all changed when Congressmen John Dingell found the funds to initiate the Rouge River 
National Wet Weather Demonstration Project (the Rouge Project).  Like most urban rivers, the 
Rouge had been well studied.  The communities had long known what needed to be done but the 
commitment for substantial federal funds freed them to get those plans implemented.  
 
HISTORY OF ROUGE RIVER RESTORATION ACTIVITIES 
 
The Rouge River 208 Plan 
When the Clean Water Act was passed in 1972, it called for watershed-wide planning throughout 
the country.  Specifically it called for all waters of the US to be “fishable and swimmable” within 
20 years. The Rouge, like many watersheds were given the opportunity to identify problems and 
prioritize them.  A great deal of federal money was made available through the federal grants 
program.  This allowed substantial upgrades to sewage collection and treatment systems.  At the 
same time, “non-point source pollution” was identified as a major concern but unfortunately the 
funding to the EPA non-point program (the 319 program) was not proportional to the problems it 
was to address. As a result, communities like those in Southeast Michigan could detail the 
challenge of urban storm water but were provided no tool to fund the projects needed to address 
this challenge. 
 
The Rouge River National Urban Runoff Program 
Using the 208 plans as the base data, the EPA choose to compare the effectiveness of storm 
water best management practices though the National Urban Runoff Program (NURP).  Using 
this funding, best management practices (BMPs) were tested in the Rouge and throughout 
Southeast Michigan.  The results were used to allow municipalities to identify which practices 
best addressed the storm water challenges within their borders.  Unfortunately, there was no 
implementation funding and many of the best practices were not implemented immediately. 
 
<<PAGE 3>>
Rouge River Remedial Action Plan (RAP) 
Due to public outcry about the condition of the Rouge River in 1985, the State of Michigan 
adopted the Rouge River Basin Strategy. A key element in this strategy was the development of 
a plan to clean up the river – the Rouge River Remedial Action Plan (Rouge River RAP). The 
original RAP was completed in 1989 consistent with the commitments made by the states, 
Canadian provinces and two federal governments as part of a Great Lakes Water Quality 
Agreement. This international agreement signed by the United States and Canada identified 42 
Areas of Concern (AOCs) in the Great Lakes Basin that needed attention. The Rouge River was 
one AOC listed (RRAC, 2004). 
 
In 1989, the original Rouge River RAP, a nine‐volume document, defined an ambitious 20‐year 
program of actions needed to protect the public health and to make substantial progress to restore 
the impaired uses of the river. Since most of the large industrial and municipal wastewater 
treatment plant discharges were either in compliance or under corrective action plans, the RAP 
placed the major emphasis for corrective actions on the combined sewer overflows (CSOs) and 
storm water discharges. At the time, the full cost of clean‐up was estimated at $900 million. 
Subsequent updates of the original RAP indicate that the full cost to restore the river is much 
higher – exceeding $2 billion (1990 dollars). 
 
The Rouge River RAP Advisory Council (RRAC) was established in 1993. The RRAC 
published the 1994 Rouge River Remedial Action Plan Update, identified the causes and sources 
of pollutants of concern, and determined what actions were needed to correct the problems to 
prevent future ones. A Rouge RAP Progress Report was published in 1998.RRAC published 
“report cards,” in 1999 and 2005 to evaluate the condition of the Rouge River and rate the 
progress of various initiatives.  
 
The RRAC is currently working on delisting criteria for the Rouge River AOC and will continue 
to help implement projects that accomplish the Rouge River RAP goals. 
 
THE ROUGE RIVER NATIONAL WET WEATHER DEMONSTRATION PROJECT 
 
The Rouge River National Wet Weather Demonstration Project (Rouge Project) was initiated in 
1992 by Wayne County (Michigan). This cooperative effort between federal, state and local 
agencies is supported by multi‐year federal grants from the United States Environmental 
Protection Agency and additional funding from local communities. 
 
The Rouge Project is a working example of how a systematic watershed approach to pollution 
control can result in cost‐effective, timely achievement of designated uses in a water body. The 
early focus of the Rouge Project was on the control of combined sewer overflows (CSOs) in the 
watershed. Although control of pollution from CSOs was identified as a major priority, it was 
determined that CSO control alone would not provide sufficient improvements to meet water 
quality standards. Sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs), storm water runoff, discharges from illicit 
connections, discharges from failed on‐site sewage disposal systems and other sources would 
continue to degrade the river. Additionally, wetlands, habitat and lakes needed restoration to 
support the fishery and wildlife desired by the citizens. This also required that flow variability 
needed to be controlled. Based upon these earlier studies, the focus of the Rouge Project became 
<<PAGE 4>>
holistic and considered the impacts from all sources of pollution and use impairments in 
receiving waters. 
 
ALLIANCE OF ROUGE COMMUNITIES 
 
The Alliance of Rouge Communities (ARC) is a voluntary 
public watershed entity currently comprised of 36 
municipal governments (i.e., cities, townships, and 
villages), three counties (Oakland, Wayne, and Washtenaw) 
and the Wayne County Airport Authority as authorized by 
Part 312 (Watershed Alliances) of the Michigan Natural 
Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 
324.101 to 324.90106) as amended by Act No. 517, Public 
Acts of 2004. 
 
The purpose of the ARC is to provide an institutional mechanism to encourage watershed‐wide 
cooperation and mutual support to meet water quality permit requirements and to restore 
beneficial uses of the river to area residents. 
 
Overview of the Rouge Project  
All of these planning efforts focused on the four primary pollutants affecting the Rouge River: 
pathogens, flow rate and volume, sediment, and nutrients. Each plan, while differing in priorities, 
was driven by six basic goals that intended to focus efforts on addressing these pollutants, the 
sources and their respective causes. These goals are: 
1) Reduce sources of pollution that threaten public health; 
2) Reduce runoff impacts through sustainable storm water management strategies and 
programs; 
3) Inform and educate the public to become watershed stewards; 
4) Protect, restore and/or enhance natural features to maintain/improve river and watershed 
ecosystems; 
5) Maximize community assets related to the watershed, and 
6) Support regional partnerships for the implementation of watershed management. 
 
Prior to the Rouge Project, remedial actions had almost exclusively focused on flooding.  In 
retrospect we find that many of the solutions were detrimental to the overall health of the river.   
Thus, as the Rouge project continued to chip away at the challenges of combined and sanitary 
sewer overflows and storm water management, the need for habitat restoration became apparent. 
 
Wet weather water pollution control is a costly challenge for local units of governments. Sanitary 
sewers are designed to carry sewage (and only sewage) to the wastewater treatment plant 
(WWTP).  Similarly, storm water drainage systems are not designed to transport sanitary 
sewage.  In practice, however, storm water enters the sanitary sewage collection systems and 
sanitary sewage often enters the storm water systems during rain events.  The Phase II Storm 
Water regulations coupled with the traditional NPDES permitting program has done much to 
identify these constraints within the sewage collection systems and the storm water drainage 
systems.  The Rouge communities have addressed these challenges head-on and are among the 

<<PAGE 5>>
very few urban communities that have a comprehensive program to address all of their wet 
weather problems.   
 
The Alliance of Rouge Communities (ARC) has been a strong supporter of the efforts of the 
local communities to improve the quality of life in Southeast Michigan.  Together with the ARC, 
many Rouge communities have completed their Combined Sewer Overflow (CSO) control 
projects, completed their Illicit Discharge Elimination Program (IDEP), initiated a locally driven 
on-site sewage disposal system (OSDS) inspection program and spent the better part of five 
years grappling with the challenges of Sanitary Sewage Overflows (SSO).  All Rouge 
communities with remaining SSO challenges have signed Consent Orders that establish the plan 
to finally address the last of the wet weather challenges. 
 
CSO Control 
The first order of business on the Rouge River was CSO control.  A three‐phased CSO control 
program was implemented that began with the construction of ten (10) CSO retention treatment 
basins and six sanitary and storm sewer separation projects. These projects have been completed 
and accepted by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ).  Examples of 
Phase I CSO Retention Treatment Basins constructed under the Rouge Projects are shown below.  
 
As a result of these costly efforts, approximately 89 of the 127 miles of stream in the Rouge 
River watershed are now free of the adverse impacts of uncontrolled CSO discharges. 
 
Acacia Park CSO Control Facility          Birmingham CSO Control Facility  Bloomfield Village CSO Facility 
 
The success of our CSO control facilities demonstrate our commitment to work with the general 
public.  These major CSO control facilities are nestled in to some of the most exclusive 
neighborhoods in Oakland County.  As you can tell, these facilities are quite attractive.  They are 
all outfitted with odor control.  They have all exceeded the requirement set forth by the MDEQ. 
The Rouge communities have documented that well-designed, well-operated CSO control 
facilities can co-exist with even the most exclusive neighborhoods and become a community 
asset. 
 
SSO Control 
Unfortunately, as these massive CSOs were controlled, the many other sources of sewage getting 
into the river began to become apparent.  SSOs, once believed to be controlled statewide, were 
discovered throughout the Rouge. 
 

<<PAGE 6>>
The design of SSO control facilities is often constrained by legal, technical, and administrative 
challenges.  Both the regulators and the regulated communities agree that the unique position of 
Michigan, surrounded by the Great Lakes, require that the standards for water quality protection 
must exceed those of most other states.  Still the communities must seek the least costly solution 
to achieve these high standards.  Thus the parties have looked for ways to provide consistency in 
the decision-making process while providing the flexibility required to control costs.   
 
The Rouge Communities shared information and initiated a variety of SSO control measures. 
The projects are grouped into the following classifications: 
1) System Flow Management 
2) SSO Treatment Demonstration 
3) Infiltration/Inflow Reduction 
4) System Capacity Expansion 
5) System Monitoring and Reporting 
 
Illicit Discharge Elimination Programs 
The early focus of the Rouge Project was on the control of CSOs in the older urban core portion 
of the downstream areas of the Rouge Watershed. As a finite number of point source CSO 
discharges could be identified and responsibility for each defined, the traditional regulatory 
approach of issuing NPDES permits mandating corrective action worked relatively well. 
Additional monitoring of the river showed that the other sources of pollution such as storm 
water runoff, discharges from illicit connections, and discharges from failed on‐site septic 
systems, needed to be controlled before full restoration of the river would be achieved 
throughout the watershed. 
 
In addition to the large scale sources of sewage in our waterways, the Rouge Communities 
quickly found that there were thousands of smaller sources – up stream of the older urban 
areas – in which sewage was entering the Rouge.  Thus the ARC established the procedures for 
locating and eliminating these sources.  The ARC then went on to provide training for municipal 
employees and contracts.  The result of these efforts has been the elimination of millions of 
gallons of sewage from the Rouge River and a consistent improvement in E. coli levels – even 
during wet weather. 
 
Measurable Results 
The Rouge Project is a success using any of several measures of achievement. Major progress 
has been made in the control of sewage being discharged to the Rouge River. For example, CSO 
pollutant loads to the river have been cut by 90 to 100 percent during most events.  SSOs have 
been controlled throughout the Rouge and progress is being made on those remaining.  
 
The most impressive part of the Rouge Project is the documented improvement.  There are tens 
of millions of data points and they are say the same thing – the Rouge is getting cleaner every 
day. 
 
<<PAGE 7>>
Dissolved Oxygen 
One of the best indicators of improved water quality is the dissolved oxygen (DO).  The 
following graph presents the continuous dissolved oxygen concentrations since 1994.  The DO 
has improved 0.22 mg/l per year for fifteen years.  In 1994, the DO routinely went to zero.  As a 
result the fishery was extremely diminished.  As the graph shows, now the DO never goes to 
zero and rarely goes below 5 mg/l.   This, of course, will support a diverse fishery. 
 
The Data collected from other branches show a similar improvement.  That data can be review 
on the ARC web site (www.allianceofrougecommunities.com). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Equally important, the bacterial data continues to improve.  In some areas of the Rouge, like the 
Upper Rouge River, all of the CSOs have been controlled, the SSO program is well underway 
and years of aggressive illicit discharge elimination programs have proven successful.  These 
0.3304372 2003 improvement/yr
ALL L05 Daily Averages DO Wet and Dry
May - October
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Jan-94
Apr-94
Jun-94
Sep-94
Dec-94
Mar-95
Jun-95
Sep-95
Dec-95
Mar-96
Jun-96
Sep-96
Dec-96
Mar-97
Jun-97
Sep-97
Dec-97
Mar-98
Jun-98
Sep-98
Dec-98
Mar-99
Jun-99
Sep-99
Dec-99
Feb-00
May-00
Aug-00
Nov-00
Feb-01
May-01
Aug-01
Nov-01
Feb-02
May-02
Aug-02
Nov-02
Feb-03
May-03
Aug-03
Nov-03
Feb-04
May-04
Aug-04
Nov-04
Feb-05
May-05
Aug-05
Oct-05
Jan-06
Apr-06
Jul-06
Oct-06
Jan-07
Apr-07
Jul-07
Oct-07
Jan-08
Apr-08
Jul-08
Oct-08
Jan-09
Apr-09
Date
DO (mg/L)
State Minimum Standard
L05 Dry
L05 Wet
All
Linear (All)
Improvement in DO of 0.22 mg/L per year
P < 0.01
DO data 
were not 
collected in 
2007
<<PAGE 8>>
areas have shown remarkable improvement to the point that the bacterial levels allow partial 
body contact at all time.   
 
E. coli improvements in the upper Rouge River 1994 to 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In other reached, like the Middle Rouge, CSOs have been controlled but SSOs remain a 
challenge and are methodically being removed.  These actions, coupled with ongoing illicit 
discharge eliminations, have allowed the return of a variety of water related recreation in the 
Impoundments created over hundred years ago by Henry Ford.  The E coli data has improve to 
the point that partial body contact is normally allowed during dry weather.  More importantly, 
the trends continue in the right direction.  This is not a surprise.  Once a sewage source is 
eliminated – whether it is CSO, SSO or an illicit discharge – the source is eliminated forever.  
Michigan imposes very stringent standards in all waterways under all flow conditions.  These 
standards are tough but the communities continue to strive to meet these standards. 
 
Middle Rouge River E coli Monitoring 2007 ‐ 2009 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
% All Samples with E. coli less
than 300 cfu/100 mls
% Wet Weather Samples with
E. coli less 300 cfu/100 mls
% Dry Weather Samples with
E. coli less than 300
cfu/100mls
2007
2008
2009

<<PAGE 9>>
Pollution Control beyond Sewage ‐ Addressing Historic Pollutants 
But even after all of the sewage sources are eliminated the Rouge Communities recognize that 
some of the historic practices have caused problems that are not going to go away by themselves.  
Within the Rouge River are a number of impoundments that have created a large number of lakes 
that provide recreational opportunities.  Unfortunately many of these lakes had become sediment 
filled including PCB contaminated sediments.  When the River was foul smelling and sewage 
laden, there was little cry for restoration of these recreational lakes.  As the water quality 
improved, however, the citizens and the communities wanted these historic problems addressed.  
The following projects are just three among over a hundred restoration projects. 
  
Carpenter Lake Restoration 
The Rouge Project and the City of Southfield lead a 
team to investigate, design, permit and provide 
construction oversight for the complete 
restoration of Carpenter Lake. The purpose of the 
project was to restore Carpenter Lake for storm 
water management, public recreation and fish and 
wildlife habitat.  The overall project included the 
removal and replacement of the existing dam; 
reduction of downstream sediment loading by 
removal of accumulated sediment; removal of 
exotic fish and plant species and re‐introduction of native fish and aquatic species; enhanced 
habitat by establishing fish and wildlife habitat features in the lake; improved aesthetics and 
recreation facilities including trail development, interpretive signage, shoreline stabilization and 
habitat restoration.  In order to accomplish this, the project scope was divided into three main 
components:  
1) The removal/demolition of the existing 
dam structure and construction of a new 
dam,  
2) Restoration of the lake itself, and  
3) The development of upland park trails and 
nature experiences.  The lake restoration 
included the removal of over 30,000 cubic 
yards of sediment, development of 
wetland shelves, construction of fish 
habitat structures within the open water 
and wetland areas, and removal of the 
predominant carp fish species.  The upland was constructed as a nature preserve, with 
wooded trails, a fishing pier and parking with integrated storm water BMPs. 
 
Newburgh Lake Restoration 
Newburgh Lake, a 105‐acre impoundment of the Middle Rouge River, had been accumulating 
sediments since it was created in the 1930s by Henry Ford.  These sediments, some containing 
elevated levels of metals and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) substantially diminished the 

<<PAGE 10>>
recreational opportunities of the lake.  Nutrient‐rich water and sediments supported excessive 
aquatic plant growth and bioaccumulative toxics such as PCBs lead to fish contamination and a 
potential human health hazard.  The Rouge Project in cooperation with Michigan Department 
of Environmental Quality, US EPA, City of Livonia and Plymouth Township, Michigan, initiated a 
project that would resurrect an urban resource.  The specific objectives for this project 
included: 
1) Restoration of water quality,  
2) Elimination of the fish consumption 
advisory for PCBs and thus reduce 
potential human health risks,  
3) Increase the amount and diversity of 
aquatic life,  
4) Increase the use of the lake for 
canoeing, boating, and fishing, with the 
long‐term goal of full body contact, and  
5) Enhance the public perception of 
Newburgh Lake as a resource for both 
recreation and education.   
 
The largest challenge of the project was the requirement to complete all construction activities 
on the face of the lake to prevent the spread of PCB contamination.  This required a variety of 
construction techniques. 
 
The Newburgh Lake Restoration Project at completion:  
 Removed 558,000 tons of sediment, 
approximately 350,000 removed 
contained PCBs  
 Eradicated, removed, and disposed of 
approximately 30,000 pounds of 
contaminated and rough fish  
 Established 10 acres of aquatic vegetation, 
 Created structural and bed fish habitat, 
 Restocked the lake with game fish, 
 Resurfaced roads, 
 Provided a new boat ramp and docks, 
 Opened up areas for more recreational use, and 
 Repaired the controls on the dam outlet structure.  
 
Rouge River Oxbow Restoration 
The main objective of the Oxbow Restoration Project was to 
restore valuable fish and wildlife 
habitat within the Rouge and to restore 
functioning riverine wetlands that 
have been lost due to channelization 
of the Rouge River.  Secondary 

<<PAGE 11>>
objectives included improvement of water quality, increased floodplain storage, 
educational/interpretative opportunities and improved aesthetics.   
The first phase of the project included excavation 
and plantings completed in Spring 2002 to restore 
Oxbow Wetlands similar to a riverine wetland 
system.  The restoration provides a 2,200 foot 
channel that varies in width from 15 to 105 feet 
and depths of 3 to 6 feet.  The channel is 
surrounded by 3 acres of submergent and emergent 
wetland systems (0-3 foot depths) that provide 
habitat for various fish species.  
 
The wetland transitions to 10 acres of existing and 
restored upland woodlands and meadow.  Uplands are planted with various tree, shrub, grass and 
wildflower species.  Bioengineering (planted slope stabilization) techniques also provide shrub 
areas.  Native fish species were introduced to the oxbow wetlands, including bass, channel 
catfish and bowfin.   
 
The island created in the middle of the oxbow will become and interpretive area for educational 
and public programs, to include camps, classes, and a Native American Village that originally 
occupied the area.   
 
Measurable Results  
Coupled with water quality improvements, the ecosystem health continues to improve as well, as 
demonstrated by several measures including increased sightings of fish and wildlife along the 
river each year since 1999. Improvements in the water quality and removal of contaminated 
sediment in Newburgh Lake resulted in the lifting of the fish consumption advisory in 2003 for 
some species of fish in the lake. This is the first time fish caught in the Rouge River system has 
been safe for consumption in decades. 
 
 B e f o r e       A f t e r  

<<PAGE 12>>
Managing Storm Water  
With continued progress on the largest pollutant sources, the ARC began to focus on more 
dispersed yet significant sources. In addition to the pollutant sources mentioned above, the focus 
was refined the focus on managing storm water runoff.  
 
While the previous storm water management efforts focused on implementing ordinances to 
address flooding, there was a renewed focus on storm water runoff quantity, quality, and rate of 
flow. As development has progressed across the watershed, natural areas like wetlands, 
woodlands riparian corridors and vegetated areas have been converted to a variety of land use 
types that consist of higher percentages of impervious surfaces such as streets, parking lots, 
rooftops, and compacted ground with turf vegetation. Increased impervious surfaces also cause 
an increase in the total volume of storm water runoff, the frequency of runoff reaching the 
streams, the peak flow rate of runoff and the quality of runoff. 
 
Thus the first emphasis was to retrofit and improve proposed infrastructure.  While the resulting 
storm water management standards varied from community to 
community and from County to County, the overall concept 
was simple.  Store a large quantity (typically the 100 year 
storm) and release it at a slow rate (typically at a 
predevelopment/agricultural runoff rate). 
 
The next step was to begin to address our poorly maintained 
existing drainage system.  A simple example of a program that 
yielded great benefit was Oakland County’s effort to inventory 
and retrofit the outlet structure of existing dry storm water 
retention ponds.  This was a low cost program that yielded 
tremendous benefits.  Similarly, the ARC prepared a series of 
training programs, videos, and supporting documents to teach 
homeowners how to maintain their private detention ponds. 
This, too, yielded tremendous benefits.  
 
Equally important was our effort to reclaim the water course itself.  Like most urban rivers, years 
of flashy hydrology have severely eroded the watercourse making it wider, flatter, sediment 
laden, and devoid of sustaining habitat.  These efforts 
were lead by the communities.  They took responsibility 
for the large scale projects like bank stabilization and 
reshaping the water course.  This included a variety of 
projects that relied on research performed across the 
country.  Thus there are examples of channel 
improvements, rock wing walls, restored pool and riffles, 
and the whole array of modifications that help support 
fisheries and the biology that supports it.   
 
 

<<PAGE 13>>
Example of Major Streambank Stabilization Project - Kingfisher Bluff  -  Dearborn, Michigan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Example of Minor Streambank Stabilization Project - Beechwoods – Southfield, Michigan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Example of Citizen Lead Streambank Stabilization using Bioengineering techniques – 
Firefighters Park, Troy Michigan 
 
 
These efforts were fortified by advocacy groups and 
volunteers.   
 
With progress being made on the large scale aspects of 
water quality management, the Rouge River communities 
refined their focus to additionally emphasize the reduction 
of storm water volume using various “green infrastructure” 
techniques. 
 
The use of green infrastructure techniques across the watershed is primarily intended to address 
the river’s “flashiness”. Green infrastructure techniques are sometimes referred to as Low Impact 
Development (LID) techniques. While LID is the terminology generally used for land 

<<PAGE 14>>
development (or re‐development), the “green 
infrastructure” is a broader term representing application 
in all areas, including new developments, redevelopment 
and existing properties. It is this last application that is the 
primary focus of green infrastructure implementation in 
the Rouge River watershed. Green infrastructure employs 
principles such as preserving and re-creating natural 
landscape features, minimizing effective imperviousness 
to create functional and appealing site drainage that treat 
storm water as a resource rather than a waste product. There are many practices that have been 
used to adhere to these principles such as bioretention facilities, rain gardens, vegetated rooftops, 
rain barrels, and permeable pavements. By implementing green infrastructure principles and 
practices, water can be managed in a way that reduces the impact of built areas and promotes the 
natural movement of water within an ecosystem or watershed. Applied on a broad scale, green 
infrastructure can maintain or restore a watershed's hydrologic and ecological functions. 
 
Poorly Drain, poorly maintained parkland transformed into restored Prairie  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
And finally, the ARC must recognize the innovative things that our industrial partners have done 
in support of improved water quality in the Rouge River.  While there have been thousands of 
smaller projects that warrant recognition, the most impressive restoration was the complete 
reconstruction of the Ford Rouge Automotive Assembly Plant.  Besides building a completely 
new, state of the art assembly plant, Ford installed constructed wetlands, pervious pavement, 
and the world’s largest green roof. 
Newly assembled Ford Mustangs parked 
on a pervious parking lot. 
Workers install a green roof on assembly 
plant. 
<<PAGE 15>>
Measurable Results  
The slow but steady progress being made within the Rouge River can only be appreciated by 
reviewing the data.  The results are striking.  The amount of data is extremely large but the 
simple conclusion is that the number of peak flow events is decreasing, the runoff volume of 
these events is decreasing and the frequency of these events is decreasing. 
 
 
 
But the most promising measurement is the return of our 
fishery and the biology that supports it.  Throughout the 
Rouge Project, the Friends of the Rouge (FOTR) have 
worked the MDEQ, the University of Michigan, the 
Communities, and their members to develop a benthic 
monitoring program (the Bug Hunt) that had sufficient 
scientific rigor to be used as an indicator of improved water 
quality.  Their data is now accepted by the regulators and the 
communities as the appropriate way of measuring success in 
implementing a storm water permitting program. 
 
 

<<PAGE 16>>
And these data, too, indicate the continued success of the Rouge Project.  In the five years since 
the FOTR program has been accepted by the MDEQ, the numbers and diversity of the benthic 
community continues to increase.  The ARC and the communities will continue to sponsor these 
data collecting activities and use the results to evaluate performance of their various storm water 
management activities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
The use of the watershed approach has emerged as the most cost‐effective and logical 
approach to water resource management in the Rouge Watershed and elsewhere. The 
challenge for the Rouge Project became to develop innovative solutions to achieve water 
quality objectives that may be:  
1) More cost‐effective,  
2) Implemented in a more timely fashion and  
Figure 5.6:  Middle Rouge Average Benthic Scores Spring 2005 - 2009
y = 3.9662x + 12.989
R2 = 0.794
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Spring 2005 Spring 2006 Spring 2007 Spring 2008 Spring 2009
Benthic Score
Trendline
Figure 5.5:  Middle Branch Average Benthic Scores Fall 2004 - 2008
y = 2.4301x + 19.231
R2 = 0.7683
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Fall 2004 Fall 2005 Fall 2006 Fall 2007 Fall 2008
Year
Site Score
Benthic Score
Trend Line
<<PAGE 17>>
3) Better able meet local needs. It has also become clear that water resources 
management must have the support of the general public in order to be effective and to 
become self‐sustaining.  
 
The Rouge Project has provided a unique opportunity for a watershed‐wide approach to 
restoring and protecting an urban river system by using a cooperative, locally based approach 
to pollution control. 
 
Based upon what was learned, the focus of the Rouge 
Project became more holistic to consider the impacts 
from all sources of pollution and use impairments in 
receiving waters by using the watershed management 
approach. There is a clear inter‐relationship of the 
pollution sources within a watershed that demands 
an inter‐related approach to a solution in order to 
achieve water quality standards and associated 
designated uses within a watershed. A piecemeal 
approach of focusing only on sources of pollution or a 
group of sources will not achieve the desired results 
nor will it achieve the acceptance of the residents of 
the watershed. The Rouge Project has learned several very important elements of using the 
watershed management approach. Those include the need to: analyze all of the various sources 
of stressors to the water quality problems in a watershed‐physical, chemical and biological; 
establish a hierarchy of pollution sources in a watershed‐point sources and nonpoint sources‐
based upon the adverse water quality impacts of those sources; and keep reinforcing, at a 
watershed level, the concept of prioritizing the control of those sources and the other stressors 
to get desired environmental protection; to recognize it may take a long time to correct some 
of these pollution sources or other physical, chemical or biological stressors so it is important to 
prioritize the control programs to get the maximum environmental improvement as soon as 
possible; critically assess the cumulative watershed impacts to quantitatively assess the 
physical, chemical and biological processes and then fashion the watershed‐based solutions to 
prevent treating the symptoms rather than effecting a cure. The management plan and tools 
that are developed must be tailored to address watershed specific problems. 
 
However, the Rouge Project also proves that given the funding to develop the tools, the urban 
communities can work together to accomplish great things – include the restoration of an 
urban river. 
 
Stonecat found at Firefighters Park in 
Troy, Michigan 
<<PAGE 18>>
