
<<PAGE 1>>
SMURRF Process Flaw 
\Storm Drain 
I 
Microfiltration 
i Raw 
Water 
i 
Indoor Plumbing 
SMURRF Process Flow Description 
Dry Weather Runoff is first "coarsen screened in a Continuous Deflective 
Separation (CDS) unit. Coarse screening removes large floating debris and 
trash (such a bottles, twigs, etc.) that typically flows down open drains in 
streets. "Coarse" screened flows are then pumped about % mile to the 
recycling facility, which can process up to 500,000 gallons per day of runoff. 
The first process unit at the recycling is the rotating drum screen. The 
rotating drum screen removes the fine floating particles (that escaped the 
coarse screening) greater than 0.04 inches in size. 
From the rotating drum (fine) screen the water flows to the cyclone-type grit 
chamber. This unit removes the grit and zand. Screening and de-gritting 
systems remove inorganic settleable material that may damage the 
downstream treatment processes and reduce the treatment efficiency. 
From the grit unit the preliminary treated water is stored in the raw water 
storage tank. The raw water storage tank dampens the fluctuations in the 
influent flows, thereby allowing downstream filtration and disinfection 
processes to operate at a steady rate, and more efficiently. 
From the raw water storage tank the water is pumped to the dissolved air 
flotation (DAF) unit. In this unit, compressed air is injected into the water at 
the unit inlet. As the water reaches the open tank surface, it reaches 
atmospheric pressure whereby fine air bubbles are released in the water. 
The air bubbles rise to the top and any with it the oil and grease. The oil 
and grease blanket formed on the DAF unit open surface is then skimmed off 
the top. 
From the DAF unit the water flows to the microfiltration treatment units. Here, 
the vacuum applied on membranes forces the water through the membrane 
thereby "filtering" out the turbidrty.,The membranes have to k periodically 
cleaned of the pollutant "buildup." 
From the microfiltration unit the water flows to the disinfection process. 
Ultraviolet (UV) radiation disinfects the water. As the water passes by the UV 
lamps in series, UV light kills bacteria and viruses. The UV bulbs have to k 
pericdically cleaned of the scale "buildup," or they wh lose efficiency. Finally, 
treated water is stored in the "clean water tank," from where it is pumped into 
the distribution system for reuse. 
<<PAGE 2>>
. ...- . 
7. '-. 
, , .. :: ;,;-.. , -. 
. ,,. - -- ,: + :.4->. -5 
; ,i.. +: :, . 
 :%:.- .,' ;. ;g.- ;,,. ;, -. 
. .. mL',,,. , 
..;;, , . 
 -, . 
.-. . . 
-- - . - %d<- 
. , . . , . .; ;*:,: - ..- .&$ .g, 
.:, . -- ',%.. -, 
.,, - 
THE SANfA MUHltCL 
. . 
URBAN RUNOH 
How +he SMURRF 
CO#rc bcnming: Dry 
weather runoff is first 
"4creened to 
we large floating debrii 
2 
and trash (such as bottles 
and twigs, etc.) that typically 
flow down open drains in 
the streets. "Coarse" 
screened flows are then 
pumped one-half mile to the 
SMURRF. The SMURRF can 
process up to 500,000 
gallons per day of runoff. 
Fine rcreanhtg: The first 
process at the SMURRF is 
the rotating drum screen. 
This rotating screen removes 
the fine floating particles 
that escaped the coarse 
screening and are greater 
than 0.04 inches in size. 
Landscaping 
Grit and sand nmovd: 
The water then flows to a 
chamber that removes grit 
and ~nd. Screening and de-gritting systems remove 
inorganic settleable material that could damage the 
downstream treatment processes and reduce their 
efficiency. 
Raw wafw rtorw Water that has been screened 
and de-gritted is stored in the raw water storage tank. 
This tank evens out the fluctuations in the influent flows, 
thereby allowing downstream filtration and disinfection 
processes to operate at a steady rate, and more efficiently. 
Oil ad wsm -mi: 
The water is pumped from 
the storage tank to the 
dissolved air flotation (DAF) 
unit. in this unit, compressed 
air is injected into the water. 
As the water approaches the 
open tank surface, it reaches 
atmospheric pressure 
whereby fine air bubbles are 
released in the water. The air 
bubbles rise to the top and 
carry oil and grease along 
with them. A blanket uf oil 
and grease is then skimmed 
off the top of the tank. 
HiaP.fHtrrtkn: The 
water flows to the micro- 
filtration treatment units. 
Here a vacuum forces water 
through membranes thereby 
filtering out the turbidity 
(cloudiness in the water). The 
membranes have to be 
periodically cleaned of the pollutant "buildup." 
Dbhktlm: The water finally flows to the disinfection 
process. Ultraviolet (UVJ radiation disinfects the water. As 
the water passes by the UV lamps in series, UV light kills 
bacteria and viruses. The UV bulbs have to be periodicalb 
cleaned of the scale "buildup" or they will lose efficiency. 
End pro)sct - Clasn Watec Finally, treated water is 
stored in the clean water tank. From this tank, water is 
pumped into the distribution system for reuse. 
<<PAGE 3>>
. I 
- 
- 
- 
 THE IANTA MONICA 
- 
RECYCLING FACILITY 
A Unique Collaboration Among Artists, Engineers 
and City Public Works ... 
Blending Technology, Art 
and Education 
Placing a water treatment facility at such a prominent tourist site is not the usual 
choke for most communities. The Clty's mandate for the SMURRF stipulated that it 
includes a significant public education component and that it is responsive to its 
immediate neighborhood. 
The intense colors of the tile works, the intriguing water features, 
the innovative architecture, and the dramatic lighting of the 
SMURRF integrate the facility with the lively atmosphere of the 
adjacent Santa Monica Pier. A trio of abstract tile mosaics at the 
foot of the stairs announces the function of the facility to 
pedestrians and motorists. The equipment was laid out in a fashion 
that would be logical to visitors, emphasizing each piece of 
equipment with a prominent base, dramatic lighting, or colorful 
tile work. The water, as it moves through the facility, is daylighted 
in five places so visitors will be able to see the results of the 
purification process. At two points, there are overlooks from which 
visitors can see the array of equipment. A photomural presents 
images of the trees that had to be removed from the site to 
accommodate the new construction. In a city like Santa Monica, 
known for its interest in "urban forestry, " a work such as this can 
ease the concerns of citizen activists. Educational material about 
1 the workings of the facility, the local urban watershed, and each 
citizen's role in preventing pollution is also available. Investing this 
potentially mundane facility with carefully considered architecture, landscape, and art 
can have a positive effect on the reception of a project by both the community and 
the governing bureaucracy. In addition to providing a valuable alternative source of 
water for Southern California residents, the project is a showcase of how a public 
facility can be used to educate the public and enhance community pride 
I 
 A project of ttw CMs of -to 
(Monlca and Lm Angeles 
<<PAGE 4>>
WHAT ISTHE SMURRF? 
The Santa Monica Urban Runoff Recycling kility (SMURRf) is a state-of-the-art, first-of-its-kind water recy- 
cling plant that wean dry weather urban runoff by conventional and advanced treatment sptms to remove 
pollutantr such as sediment, oil, grease, and pathogens. Basically, the SMURRF recyctes polluted runoff so it can 
be mused for beneficial purposes. 
OfSanlil M4'nio1 
 The SMURRF is one of the finest examples of he future of dealing with polluted urban runoff to the maxi- 
mum extent possible protecting coastal waters for future genedons. 
HOW MUCH WATER CAN ITTREAT? 
The Santa Monlca Urban Runoff Recycling Facility will treab clean, and reuse up ta 500,000 gallons of runoff 
per day which Is about 4 percent of the City of Santa Monica's daily water use. 
FROM WHERE DOES THIS WATER COME? 
The SMURRF cleans urban runoff fmm the City of Santa Monica's m largest flows, the Plco-Kenter and Pier 
Storm Dains, which drain 4,200 and 900 acres respeedully.These two storm drains contribute hut 90 per- 
cent of the City's tofa1 daily dry weather runoff.The Pico-Kenter drainage am includes parts of the City of 
Los Angela and the Smta -Monica Mountains. 
Dry weather runoff is created from excess irrigation, spills, construdon sites. pool draining, car washing, wash- 
ing down paved areas. and residual wet weather runoff. 
HOW DOES THE SMURRF WORK? 
The treatment processes include coarse and fine screening to remove ah, plant material and debrls,degrlt- 
ting systems to remove- sand and grk dissolved air floatation (DAF) to remove oiI and grease, micrdltration 
to remove turbidiry, and ultravlokt (UV) radiation to kill pathogens. 
WHAT IS THE TREATED WATER USED FOR? 
The highly-tmtd SMURRF water will be used for landscape irrigation and for indoor commercial buildlng 
use. Once puriffed,he water is safe for all landscape irrigation and dual-plumbing systems as prescribed by the 
California Deparment of Health Services and meets all of California's Tide 22 requinments. 
Landscape irrigation customers include the Olymplc Boulevard center median, City of Santa Monlca parks, and 
the Woodlawn Cemetery. Dual-plumbed customers will Include the City of Sanra Monica's Public Safety Facility 
and the Water Garden located at Olympic and Qoverfleld. 
HOW MUCH DID If COST? 
The SMURRF cost approximately $ I2 milllon including the distribution system for recycled water. The SMUR- 
RF is a multi-agency partnership built upon the regional benefits of the facility. Funding sources include the City 
of Sanm Monica, the Ciq of Los Angeles, the State Water Resources Control Board, the Metropolitan Water 
DMa. Federal ISTEA Grant Funds, and he Los Angeles Cwnty Proposition "A" Grant. 
<<PAGE 5>>
continued.. . 
WHAT ARE THE UPECTED BENEFITS? 
By treating urban runoff during dry weather, the SMURRF is reducing pollution reaching Santa Monica Bay. Not 
only is this improvement in water quality beneficial to aquatic life and beach goers, it may also increase the eco- 
nomic value of the Bay and reduces the regions need for imported water. 
WILL THE SMURRF SOLVE THE POLLUTION PROBLEM IN THE SANTA MONICA BAY? 
No, but it will help. Although the SMURRF can treat 500,000 gallons of water per day, 100 million gallons of 
urban runoff flow through storm drains in 10s Angeles County and into the ocean on a dry weather day, Wet 
weather flows can increase to I0 billion gallons of urban runoff each day. 
While the SMURRF is helping to curb pollution in the Santa Monica Bay, residents and busipesses are sdll strong- 
ly encouraged to join the effort by adopring simple pollution prevention practices. Residents and businesses are 
the number one source of pollution, through their collective misbehaviors such as littering, not picking up after 
their pets, over applying pesticides, and illegal dumping of used motor oil and other toxins. 
WHAT 15 URBAN RUNOFF? 
Urban runoff is the single greatest source of water pollutants, contributing from 50-60 percent of the pollutant 
load in a receiving water body. Urban runoff includes ail water draining from streets, parking lots, driveways, 
lawns, etc. and flowing through the storm drain system. In most cases, urban runoff receives no treatment before 
draining to the ocean. 
Urban runoff picks up oil and grease, litter, trash, bacteria and viruses, debris, sediments, organic chemicals like 
pesticides, fungicides, insecticides, and heavy metals like copper, cadmium, and rlnc. 
WHY 15 URBAN RUNOFF A PROBLEM? 
A recent study determined that there is an increased risk of illness associated with swimming near flowing storm 
drain outlets in the Sanm Monica Bay. Improving water quality in the Santa Monica Bay will provide a healthier 
recreation area benefiting residents, marine life, businesses, and visitors to the Los Angeles area. 
WHAT CAN RESIDENTS DO TO HELP PREVENT POLLUTION? 
n Do not litter. 
W 
 Always pick up after your dog. 
W 
 Recycle used motor oil and transmission fluid. 
H 
 Use fertilizers and pesticides sparingly. 
H 
 Sweep dirt and debris from pavement and dispose of it in the trash. 
H 
 Pick up litter and dispose of it in the trash. 
bb 
 Dispose of household toxins through your local household hazardous waste collection program. 
w 
 Check out the following websites: 
http:/lpen.ci.sanra-monica.ca.uslcmlindex.htm http:llwww.LAstormwater.org/ 
WHY DOES THE SMURRF LOOK SO UNIQUE? 
The SMURRF is a walk-through facility providing educational information and serving as an access way for the 
public to reach the beach and adjacent businesses. 
The intense colors of the tile works, the jntriguing water features, the innovative architecture, and the dramat- 
ic lighting of the SMURRF integrate the facilicy with the lively atmosphere of the adjacent Santa Monica Pier-The 
equipment is arranged in sequential order and oriented towards the viewer so that visitors can follow the tech- 
nology and the process visually.The water daylights jn five places as it moves through the facility so visitors will 
be able to see the results of the purification process. 
In addition to providing a valuable alternative source of water for Southern California residents, the project is a 
showcase of how a public facility can be used to educate che public and enhance community pride. 
<<PAGE 6>>
