The California Microbial Source Identification Manual: 
A Tiered Approach to Identifying 
Fecal Pollution Sources to Beaches
John F. Griffith
 Blythe A. Layton
Alexandria B. Boehm
Patricia A. Holden
Jennifer A. Jay
Charles Hagedorn
Charles D. McGee
Stephen B. Weisberg
Technical Report 804 - December 2013
<<PAGE 1>>
 
 
The California Microbial Source Identification 
Manual: A Tiered Approach to Identifying 
Fecal Pollution Sources to Beaches 
 
 
John F. Griffith1, Blythe A. Layton1, Alexandria B. Boehm2, Patricia 
A. Holden3, Jennifer A. Jay4, Charles Hagedorn5, Charles D. 
McGee6 and Stephen B. Weisberg1 
 
1Southern California Coastal Water Research Project, Costa Mesa, CA 92626 
 
2Stanford University, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, 
Stanford, CA 94305 
 
3University of California, Bren School of Environmental Science & Management, 
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 
 
4University of California, Civil and Environmental Engineering Department, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095 
 
5Virginia Tech, Department of Crop & Soil Environmental Sciences, Blacksburg, VA 
24061 
6Independent consultant, Orange County, CA 
 
 
 
 
Technical Report 804 
December 2013 
 
 
<<PAGE 2>>
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLOSURE 
Funding for this project has been provided in full or in part through an agreement with the State 
Water Resources Control Board. The contents of this document do not necessarily reflect the 
views and policies of the State Water Resources Control Board, nor does mention of trade names 
or commercial products constitute endorsement or recommendation for use. 
 
<<PAGE 3>>
i 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
List of Acronyms ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................1 
Chapter 1: Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ ............2 
1.1 The Tiered Approach ................................ ................................ ................................ .........3 
Chapter 2: (Step 1) Gathering Information to Formulate Hypotheses About Potential Fecal 
Sources................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......4 
2.1 Meeting with Stakeholders ................................ ................................ ................................ 4 
2.2 Mapping Topographic, Infrastructure, and Land Use Information ................................ ......5 
2.3 Conducting Field Reconnaissance to Identify Visible Sources ................................ ...........6 
2.4 Synthesizing Gathered Information to Generate Hypotheses ................................ .............. 8 
Chapter 3: (Step 2) Using Fecal Indicator Bacteria Data to Evaluate Hypotheses and 
Prioritize Sources for Further Investigation ................................ ................................ ..........10 
3.1 Gathering FIB Data ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 10 
3.2 Examining Spatial FIB Patterns ................................ ................................ .......................  10 
3.3 Examining Temporal FIB Patterns ................................ ................................ ...................  12 
Chapter 4: (Step 3) Traditional Methods for Identifying Leaks in Sanitary Sewer and On-
Site Wastewater Treatment Systems ................................ ................................ .....................15 
4.1 Separate Sewage Conveyance Systems ................................ ................................ ............ 15 
4.2 On-Site Water Treatment Systems ................................ ................................ ...................  20 
Chapter 5: (Step 4) Indicators of Human Fecal Pollution ................................ .....................22 
5.1 Bacterial Markers ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 22 
5.2 Human Viral Markers ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 23 
5.3 Chemical Source Tracking ................................ ................................ ...............................  23 
Chapter 6: (Step 5) Non-human Source-Associated Markers ................................ ..............26 
6.1 Selecting Appropriate Markers ................................ ................................ ........................  26 
6.2 Choosing Appropriate Non-Human Source-Associated Fecal Markers ............................  27 
Chapter 7: (Step 6) Microbial Community Analysis ................................ .............................. 29 
7.1 Types of Microbial Community Analysis Methods ................................ ..........................  31 
7.2 Current State of Development and Method Recommendations ................................ ......... 33 
Chapter 8: Study Design................................ ................................ ................................ .........34 
8.1 Sampling Plan Design ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 34 
8.2 Cost Considerations ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 35 
8.3 Human Marker Considerations ................................ ................................ ........................  35 
8.4 Nonhuman Marker Considerations ................................ ................................ ..................  36 
8.5 MCA Considerations ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 36 
<<PAGE 4>>
ii 
 
Chapter 9: Source Identification Limitations and Anticipated Advancements in the Field
 ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .................38 
9.1 False Negatives ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  38 
9.2 False Positives ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  39 
9.3 Source Apportionment ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 39 
9.4 Source Resolution................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 39 
Further Reading ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................41 
Traditional Methods ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  41 
MST Method Evaluation in California ................................ ................................ ...................  41 
Field Case Studies ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  42 
Appendix A: Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for Recommended MST Marker 
Methods ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...44 
 
<<PAGE 5>>
1 
LIST OF ACRONYMS 
CA: California 
CBI: Clean Beaches Initiative 
CCTV: Closed Circuit Television 
CIWQS: California Integrated Water Quality System 
DNA: Deoxyribonucleic Acid 
ELISA: Enzyme‐linked Immunosorbent Assay 
ENT: Enterococcus 
EPA: Environmental Protection Agency 
FIB: Fecal Indicator Bacteria 
GIS: Geographic Information Systems 
GPS: Global Positioning System 
MCA: Microbial Community Analysis 
MST: Microbial Source Tracking 
OB: Optical Brighteners 
OWTS: Onsite Wastewater Treatment System 
PCR: Polymerase Chain Reaction 
POTW: Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
qPCR: Quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction 
RNA: Ribonucleic Acid 
RV: Recreational Vehicle 
SIPP: Source Identification Protocol Project 
SOP: Standard Operating Procedure 
SSMP: Sewer System Management Plan 
SSO: Sanitary Sewer Overflow 
TMDL: Total Maximum Daily Load 
TRFLP: Terminal Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism 
WDR: Waste Discharge Requirements 
  
<<PAGE 6>>
2 
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION 
California’s beaches represent an important recreational and economic resource. Almost 300,000 
jobs relate to coastal tourism and recreation, accounting for 75% of employment in the state’s 
ocean economy sector and contributing $12 billion to the state’s gross domestic product. Fecal 
pollution at beaches poses both aesthetic and health concerns for visitors. Beach advisories or 
closures due to fecal contamination detection may result in local economic losses of up to 
$100,000 per day. 
Recognizing the value of beaches to California residents and the state’s economy, the California 
Clean Beaches Initiative (CBI) Program has provided approximately $100 million since 2001 for 
projects to improve beach water quality at many of the state’s most contaminated beaches. These 
funds have gone toward implementing best management practices, such as diverting storm drains 
to reduce runoff flows during the dry season, repairing aging sewer lines, and creating natural 
runoff filtration areas.  
Despite the CBI’s successes, a number of beaches still frequently exceed water quality standards 
for fecal indicator bacteria (FIB) and lack cleanup strategies, largely because the fecal 
contamination sources are unknown. FIB can originate from numerous sources, including human 
sewage; manure from livestock operations, wildlife, or urban runoff; and even growth in the 
environment. In any given water body, effective management and mitigation requires knowledge 
of the source(s) of fecal contamination and of FIB, which are not always the same.  
Microbial source tracking (MST) methods can identify FIB host sources, including those that 
carry the greatest human health risk. Some new MST methods discriminate between human and 
non-human fecal sources, and others distinguish among several animal sources. However, these 
methods do not perform equally well. Within the plethora of methods, each has a different set of 
advantages. To improve understanding of method performance, the CBI funded a comprehensive 
MST method evaluation study in 2011, referred to as the Source Identification Protocol Project 
(SIPP). The SIPP quantified specificity and sensitivity for 41 MST methods. 
Still, many questions remain: how to employ different marker types and how new genetic source 
identification methods might be combined with traditional methods, such as dye testing of pipe 
networks. Thus, agencies charged with identifying FIB sources to beaches may hesitate to move 
forward with studies or, conversely, deploy too many techniques, which can be prohibitively 
expensive.  
To address these information gaps, the CBI supported the SIPP in developing this source 
identification manual. It provides guidance for cost-effectively identifying sources of fecal 
contamination within a watershed. The manual is based on a hypothesis-driven and tiered 
approach, in which the user implements the least expensive options first and more expensive 
tools only when sufficient uncertainty warrants their use.  
 
 
<<PAGE 7>>
3 
1.1 The Tiered Approach 
This document describes six tiered steps to implement a hypothesis-driven, science-based 
microbial source identification approach, while conserving resources through progressive 
deployment:  
1) Characterize the watershed by obtaining infrastructure maps, interviewing relevant local 
experts, and conducting visual inspections to develop a list of potential fecal 
contamination sources. 
2) Examine historical and current FIB monitoring data for spatial and temporal trends to 
help identify conditions that result in elevated FIB levels and examine linkages to the 
greatest potential sources of fecal contamination. 
3) Where leakage from a sanitary system is a potential source, investigate it using traditional 
tools such as smoke testing, dye testing, or camera inspection. 
4) Where human sources are a potential contributor, test ambient waters for human source-
specific genetic markers (even if traditional tools have not identified a leaking sanitary 
system). Place high priority on either detecting or confirming a human fecal source, as 
this source may pose the greatest relative health risk. 
5) Where human sources have been accounted for and the relative human loadings are better 
understood, and/or a likely animal fecal pollution source (e.g., runoff from a horse farm) 
has been identified, test ambient waters using non-human (animal) source-specific 
genetic markers. 
6) Where source-specific genetic markers have yet to be developed for the suspected 
source(s), consider testing ambient waters using genetic community analysis methods. 
Users may also be able to employ these methods to differentiate sources within common 
host types (e.g., human fecal pollution from sewage vs. septage). These methods may be 
complemented with chemical methods (as appropriate) to provide additional independent 
information, particularly when sewage or other human waste is a suspected source.  
 
The chapters in this manual provide procedures or design guidance to implement each of these 
steps. In addition, pointers reference other documents where guidance already exists for that 
activity, and case studies (shown in boxes) illustrate successful implementation examples. 
Finally, the appendices detail standard operating procedures for each of the manual’s 
recommended genetic test methods. This manual provides guidance to agencies charged with 
identifying FIB sources to beaches. For additional information or questions, please contact Dr. 
John Griffith (johng@sccwrp.org). 
 
  
<<PAGE 8>>
4 
CHAPTER 2: (STEP 1) GATHERING INFORMATION TO FORMULATE HYPOTHESES 
ABOUT POTENTIAL FECAL SOURCES  
Source identification begins with gathering information to develop hypotheses about potential 
fecal contamination sources. This step sets the stage for cost-effective, targeted sampling to 
either confirm or de-emphasize hypothesized sources using appropriate investigative techniques. 
Hypothesis generation involves five main activities: 
• Meet with local experts who have knowledge of the watershed to obtain and synthesize 
relevant information about possible sources;  
• Gather information about the location, age, and condition of local storm and sanitary 
sewer infrastructure; 
• Gather historical FIB monitoring data along with monitoring location maps; 
• Conduct field reconnaissance by walking the beach and watershed to visually identify 
possible sources; 
• Synthesize information to generate hypotheses. 
 
2.1 Meeting with Stakeholders  
Local organizations with institutional knowledge about the watershed, beach, and infrastructure 
often hold the best available information about potential bacterial contamination sources. The 
first step is to identify these potential collaborative organizations and initiate information transfer 
via phone, in-person interviews, and/or stakeholder meetings. In watersheds with on-site 
wastewater treatment systems, also seek to engage property owners through community 
education/outreach and public meetings. Potential collaborative organizations include (but are 
not limited to):  
• Municipal agencies responsible for maintenance of stormwater and/or sewage systems,  
• Environmental health agencies who are routinely monitoring beach and tributary surface 
water quality for FIB,  
• Wastewater treatment agencies,  
• California State Parks,  
• The California Coastal Commission,  
• Regional Water Quality Control Board(s),  
• Local military installations, 
• Local universities and other research institutions that study water quality in the area, and 
• Local nongovernmental organizations that conduct citizen monitoring.  
 
In many cases, responsibility for sanitary and stormwater infrastructure upkeep spans multiple 
agencies and jurisdictions throughout the watershed associated with the beach. For example, 
cities may maintain smaller sanitary and stormwater collection systems, while the county may 
monitor beach water quality and manage the main storm drain channels. Likewise, municipalities 
<<PAGE 9>>
5 
may own and maintain the sanitary collection system within their borders, but contract out 
wastewater treatment to a sanitation district. Anyone who has knowledge of the water 
infrastructure, including monitoring data, should participate in the information reconnaissance 
step. 
At the first stakeholder meeting, present historical data and discuss it with participants, focusing 
on how they can provide missing information. Request from regulatory agencies (Regional 
Water Quality Control Boards) any available information and data associated with Total 
Maximum Daily Loads (TMDLs), prohibitions, Sanitary Sewer Overflow (SSO) Reduction 
Programs, or other programs that require monitoring and reporting. Ask the municipal agencies 
responsible for the sanitary and stormwater infrastructure to provide any data necessary to 
complete GIS maps. In addition, much valuable information to inform source investigation 
already resides in their Sewer System Management Plans (SSMPs), which are prepared in 
accordance with state regulations (see Box 2.1). Look for additional information in documents 
related to Illicit Connections/Illicit Discharges (ICID) regulations. 
Note: The initial stakeholder meeting represents the first conversation of an ongoing dialogue 
between stakeholder group members and the study team. If you later identify additional 
stakeholders, include them in future meetings. 
 
 
2.2 Mapping Topographic, Infrastructure, and Land Use Information  
Leaking sanitation infrastructure represents a high-risk fecal contamination source, and you 
should gather information about the location and condition of this infrastructure early in the 
investigative process. Include the location of septic tanks/leach fields, pump stations, collection 
systems, and publicly owned treatment works (POTWs) or privately operated wastewater 
treatment facillities. Identify the waste disposal system for all land parcels near the beach. Note 
portions of the system with deferred maintenance and frequently reported SSOs to help identify 
areas most susceptible to sanitary sewer failures. Also, check for areas where lines have been 
recently replaced or slip-lined to avoid wasting effort in locations where problems were 
previously identified and repaired.  
Box 2.1: Documents available through regulatory requirements 
In California, the State Water Resources Control Board adopted Statewide General Waste 
Discharge Requirements (WDRs) for Sanitary Sewer Systems via Water Quality Order No. 
2006-0003 on May 2, 2006. The State updated the requirements in 2008 and anticipates 
additional updates in 2013. Visit 
http://www.waterboards.ca.gov/water_issues/programs/sso/index.shtml to find documentation. 
The WDRs apply to public agencies that own or operate sanitary sewer systems greater than 
one mile long. They require these agencies to develop and implement sewer system 
management plans (SSMPs) and report all sewer system overflows to an online database. 
The SSMPs must contain an up-to-date map of the collection system, a condition assessment 
and rehabilitation plan to identify and prioritize system deficiencies needing correction, and a 
schedule for addressing deficiencies. Other areas relevant to source identification efforts 
include operation and maintenance descriptions, performance goals, the overflow emergency 
response plan, the fats/oils/grease control program, the capital improvement plan, and the 
public communication program. Note any missing, incomplete, or inadequate documents as 
well as patterns of sewage spills. 
 
<<PAGE 10>>
6 
If this resource is available, enter this information into a GIS mapping system, which allows 
synthesis of the many different data types related to the study site. With GIS layers, you can 
spatially examine relationships between storm and sanitary infrastructure, geographic features, 
land use patterns, and population density. GIS data usually already exist for stormwater and 
sewer infrastructure managed by public agencies. If the watershed crosses multiple jurisdictions, 
integrate individual GIS shape files from each jurisdiction in order to create a comprehensive 
map of all infrastructure systems potentially affecting the beach.  
Areas with privately owned Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems (OWTSs) may not have 
readily available GIS data; however, some publicly available data may exist in the local county 
permitting or planning agency’s real estate records. Inspection records should indicate the 
location of both tanks and leach fields. You should build a GIS layer with the approximate 
latitude and longitude coordinates obtained from these records if available. Additional 
information on the location and condition of OWTSs may be available through documents 
related to the AB885 regulations.  
Map land use information to identify activities in the watershed that may contribute FIB to the 
beach. Layers should include residential areas, crop farming, livestock operations, horse stables, 
and dog parks. Depending on the watershed’s data availability, additional valuable layers might 
include features such as piers, golf courses, or homeless encampments. If possible, note locations 
with landfills, biosolid dispersal, or recycled water irrigation. 
Add to the database the spatial locations of FIB monitoring in the watershed, based on local 
agency monitoring data (Chapter 3). If possible, categorize data into magnitudes for differential 
display on the map. Co-displaying FIB data (especially data gathered over a long period) within 
maps of infrastructure and key watershed features can be quite useful in forming hypotheses 
regarding fecal sources to creeks, streams, and the beach. 
2.3 Conducting Field Reconnaissance to Identify Visible Sources 
Thorough watershed reconnaissance usually means walking the area. This typically starts at the 
beach and moves up along the main stem of the watershed, branching out into smaller drainages 
as needed to identify all potential point and non-point fecal contamination sources.  
Sanitary Surveys 
You may choose to walk the watershed informally or as part of a formal sanitary survey. 
Sanitary surveys standardize collection of both physical and observational data. Physical 
parameters include water temperature, wave height, alongshore current direction, wind speed, 
and precipitation. Observational data include the number of swimmers, types and numbers of 
wild and domestic animals, flows from storm drains or creeks, tidal conditions, and presence of 
beach debris. This information may help explain both short-term water quality changes and 
correlative relationships between beach conditions and FIB concentrations. Aim to conduct 
sanitary surveys several times throughout the year to capture seasonal variations in the above 
parameters. 
To aid in assessing the beach, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has developed 
detailed guidance on how to conduct a sanitary survey, including useful forms and checklists for 
<<PAGE 11>>
7 
conducting study site reconnaissance. Download the EPA Marine Beach Sanitary Survey User 
Manual at http://water.epa.gov/type/oceb/beaches/upload/Marine-Beach-Sanitary-Survey-User-
Manual-March-2013.pdf. Check with local monitoring agencies for available data, as many 
agencies gather the data needed to complete sanitary surveys as part via their normal routine 
water sample collection procedures.  
The EPA manual describes two different types of surveys: A “Routine On-Site Sanitary Survey” 
and an “Annual Marine Beach Sanitary Survey.” If local monitoring agencies have adopted the 
EPA’s routine survey form, data needed to complete the annual survey form will be directly 
transferable. The routine survey involves a simple two-page form intended to record physical and 
observational data as each water sample is collected. The annual survey uses a 13-page form 
designed to facilitate a comprehensive watershed assessment. It both inventories information to 
be collected when characterizing a site and contains a tool to synthesize daily observations and 
examine water quality trends as they relate to other parameters.  
Infrastructure Sources 
Starting from the beach, note the location of all drainages flowing into the main stem of each 
storm drain or channel flowing to the beach. Photograph each flowing sub-drain and record its 
GPS coordinates to validate against your GIS map. When possible, identify the source of the 
flow. Be careful not to overlook any flowing drains, since even a small volume of water with 
very high FIB concentrations can contaminate a much larger volume of water. Repeat watershed 
reconnaissance several times, as many drains flow intermittently and you may miss a potentially 
large source of bacteria if limited to a single exercise. Also, note the location of storm water 
diversions (if present) as well as their size and capacity. 
While in the field, record the GPS coordinates of each identified onsite wastewater treatment 
system (OWTS). You may need to work with the county or other local agencies to obtain access 
to private land adjacent to a water body. Note the proximity of leach fields to flowing surface 
water. Look for ponding water, signs of sogginess, and vegetation indicating saturation in the 
areas where leach fields are expected. Also, look for large trees near tanks and leach fields, 
which can disrupt the system with their roots. Notice any water seeping from the sides of the 
creek bed near these systems.  
Non-Point Sources 
During field reconnaissance, keep an eye out for non-point sources where fecal material may 
directly enter or wash into the drainage system. Fecal material from individual humans is capable 
of spreading disease, so be sure to visually inspect the watershed for evidence of homeless 
encampments. Pay particular attention to areas under bridges and brushy areas alongside and in 
creek beds.  
When an encampment is located, inspect the surrounding area for evidence of cesspits or human 
excrement that may affect water quality. The nearest flowing water may be used to carry away 
waste from homeless encampments. Inspect areas such as large drain openings, creek banks, and 
swales. If homeless persons are living in recreational vehicles or automobiles, check for sewage 
discharge or leaking from the RV’s sanitary system or manual emptying of “chamber pots” onto 
the street or into nearby storm drains. 
<<PAGE 12>>
8 
Other notable non-point sources include roaming domestic and wild animals. Flocks of birds 
passing through tidal estuaries or deer and raccoons in riparian habitats, for instance, can produce 
significant amounts of FIB. Note areas frequented by domestic or stray dogs. Likewise, check for 
pet waste in residential areas where drainages border homes. Record any evidence of excrement 
found in or near creeks and drains. 
In rural or semi-rural agricultural areas, inspect livestock operations and horse stables to 
determine how the operator disposes of manure. Manure often ends up in a culvert or creek. Note 
where BMPs are preventing direct deposition of livestock feces into water bodies, as microbial 
attenuation from fecal aging can significantly lower the potential risk of health impacts 
compared to direct deposition. For crop-farming operations, check to see if runoff from fields 
reaches the drainage. Also, note portable toilets used by field laborers or others, including the 
frequency of pump-outs and the responsible parties. 
2.4 Synthesizing Gathered Information to Generate Hypotheses 
Information gathered during beach and watershed reconnaissance, meetings with local experts, 
evaluating the historical monitoring data for its spatial patterns, and GIS mapping should form 
the basis for generating hypotheses as to the likely sources of FIB to the beach. The objective of 
this step is to identify a wide array of possible sources to systematically evaluate in later tiers of 
the source identification process. 
A hypothesis is simply a statement that one can evaluate as true or false. Each statement 
proposes an explanation for the observed phenomena, in this case the bacterial water quality 
problem at the beach in question. For example, one testable hypothesis states, “The sanitary 
sewer system is leaking and raw sewage is being released into the ocean.” An example of a poor 
(untestable) hypothesis might be “All of the FIB come from swimmers.” In this statement, it is 
not possible to definitively evaluate whether “all” of the FIB come from swimmers. An 
improved version of this hypothesis would be “Swimmers are a major contributor to FIB at the 
beach.” 
In generating hypotheses, consider the possibility of faulty sanitary sewer infrastructure as a high 
priority, since this source carries high disease potential, can be easily investigated, and typically 
has a straightforward solution. Sanitary sewers near beaches are often aged and may be made of 
materials, such as cast iron, that are subject to corrosion when exposed to salt water. In addition, 
shifting sands, tree roots, or seismic activity commonly disrupt the gravity portion of these 
collection systems. GIS map examination can help to determine if a sanitary sewer is in close 
proximity to the beach. Special attention should be paid to pump stations and locations where 
sanitary and storm sewer lines run in parallel or cross, as these are the most likely points where 
sewage leaking from sanitary lines may enter the storm drain system. 
Septic systems also carry high disease potential and can contribute FIB to adjacent surface water 
if the system is failing, overloaded or simply located too close to surface waters. Consider the 
age and depth of the system when developing hypotheses related to OWTSs. Even a properly 
functioning septic system, combined with a high water table, can contaminate the groundwater 
that, in turn, exchanges with surface and marine waters near the coast. Many problems that affect 
sanitary sewer conveyance systems also affect septic systems, such as corrosion from saltwater 
<<PAGE 13>>
9 
or disruption by tree roots. Pay special attention to any parcels where the leach field is obviously 
failing (indicated by saturated soil, ponding water, etc.). California’s AB885 regulations provide 
formal definitions of a failed septic system.1 
Another common source of FIB to beaches are conveyances for stormwater, which in the case of 
many streams, creeks, rivers, and storm drains may discharge near the top of the beach and run 
over the sand into the water. During dry weather, storm sewers may carry FIB-containing 
groundwater and nuisance runoff to the beach. They may also convey contaminated water from 
sources such as illicit connections or leaking sanitary sewers farther up the watershed. Further, 
tidal flushing of storm drains has been known to introduce FIB from bird droppings and 
decaying plant material into beach water. 
Geographic features such as piers often relate to FIB contamination and leaking sanitary sewer 
infrastructure under piers has been observed in the past. Other human activities that generate FIB 
near piers, such as cleaning fish, have been well documented. Further, birds roost on piers and 
their droppings may be deposited directly into the water or washed off the pier by maintenance 
workers. The continuous shade under piers may contribute to higher levels of FIB in sand due to 
the lack of solar inactivation.  Also take note of good management practices, such as fish 
cleaning stations tied into the sanitary sewer, that may help narrow the list of potential sources to 
be investigated. 
Finally, land-use patterns can greatly affect bacterial concentrations in water. Each land use has 
the potential to contribute different sources of FIB. For example, urban areas may contain 
bacteria from leaking trash dumpsters or restaurants that hose food waste into storm drains. 
Agricultural operations rely on fertilizer application and may not have adequate restroom 
facilities for field workers. Runoff from agricultural land containing fertilizers, which help FIB 
to grow in the environment, or human waste deposited in fields and washed into streams by 
irrigation water are well-documented sources of FIB. 
Sound hypotheses serve as the basis for a study design, and are essential to a successful source 
identification effort. Once you have generated a list of reasonable, testable hypotheses, use the 
methods described in Chapters 3 through 7 to evaluate them.  
  
                                                
1 The full text of the State Water Resources Control Board’s OTWS policy, including definitions of system failure, 
can be found at http://www.swrcb.ca.gov/water_issues/programs/owts/docs/owts_policy.pdf. 
<<PAGE 14>>
10 
CHAPTER 3: (STEP 2) USING FECAL INDICATOR BACTERIA DATA TO EVALUATE 
HYPOTHESES AND PRIORITIZE SOURCES FOR FURTHER INVESTIGATION 
The second source identification step uses cultivable FIB, such as Escherichia coli and 
Enterococcus to test and prioritize hypotheses generated in the first tier. This initial evaluation 
tier uses FIB data because they often already exist from routine monitoring. Where FIB data do 
not already exist, they cost less to collect compared to other fecal contamination identification 
methods; in addition, local agencies or volunteer groups can typically collect FIB data without a 
high level of expertise or specialized equipment.  
Evaluating source identification hypotheses begins with examining spatial and/or temporal 
patterns in FIB data. Temporal patterns examine whether high FIB concentrations on the beach 
are associated with phenomena such as tides or precipitation. Spatial patterns elicit whether 
certain portions of the watershed see an increase in FIB concentrations, such as confluence with 
a tributary or features such as piers or bird colonies. The sections below elaborate on initial 
hypothesis testing using FIB data; more expensive confirmatory technology will focus only on 
the most likely sources. 
3.1 Gathering FIB Data 
You may need to collect additional FIB data to evaluate alternative hypotheses. In particular, 
examining spatial patterns in the watershed may require samples from a larger geographical area 
than those collected in routine monitoring programs. Data to examine long period temporal 
patterns at the beach, in contrast, are often available from historic sources. Sources include a) 
Heal the Bay (http://brc.healthebay.org) in Southern California and b) the California 
Environmental Data Exchange Network (http://www.ceden.us/AdvancedQueryTool), which 
compiles monitoring data from all available sources statewide, including local health 
departments and monitoring programs required by discharge permits. In some watersheds, 
additional useful FIB data from special studies or from citizen monitoring groups may be 
available for locations that are not routinely monitored.  
 
Additional monitoring requirements may apply to some beaches and associated watersheds, such 
as those associated with FIB-based Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMDLs). Freshwater bacterial 
TMDLs sometimes require stormwater agencies to conduct monitoring at multiple locations 
throughout the watershed. Find site-specific information on current TMDLs and Regional Board 
prohibitions at the “Safe to Swim” website administered by the California Water Monitoring 
Council (http://www.mywaterquality.ca.gov/safe_to_swim/index.shtml). Sanitary sewer 
overflow (SSO) monitoring data appear in the California Integrated Water Quality System 
(CIWQS) database at http://www.waterboards.ca.gov/water_issues/programs/sso.  
3.2 Examining Spatial FIB Patterns 
Most commonly, evaluating your hypotheses will require examination of spatial FIB patterns. 
For instance, does FIB concentration increase after the confluence of each major tributary? 
Alternatively, do FIB concentrations change as the characteristics of the watershed change, such 
as from agricultural to urban land use? Assess spatial trends in dry and wet season data 
separately, or use a monthly average. Geometric means may be superior to averages depending 
<<PAGE 15>>
11 
on the distribution of data at a particular site. In examining these spatial patterns, consider not 
only FIB levels, but also FIB loading from identified fecal sources. Even with a high FIB level in 
the upper watershed, the small water volume reaching the beach may not be meaningful when 
diluted by the larger volumes in the lower watershed, allowing its elimination as a high-priority 
source.  
Assess whether contamination is spatially associated with specific features on the beach, such as 
piers or storm drains. When examining the spatial relationship of a feature to FIB, take into 
account the prevailing current direction when the sample was taken. You can infer current 
direction from measured field data or ocean buoy data on wind and swell direction in the vicinity 
of the study site.  
Finally, pair FIB data with GIS maps of existing infrastructure. Examine GIS maps of sanitary 
sewers, storm sewers, and OWTSs overlain with FIB data to look for relationships between 
persistent FIB contamination, high levels of FIB contamination, and proximity to infrastructure. 
Take into consideration the age and general condition of infrastructure as well as evidence of 
infrastructure degradation from SSMPs, such as the frequency of leaks that have required repair, 
to gauge the general condition of the system and the likelihood of additional leaks. A spatial 
relationship between proximity to sanitary sewer infrastructure or OWTSs and increased FIB in 
field data suggests the sanitation system(s) should be investigated as a potential source. When 
you suspect faulty infrastructure, bring this to the attention of the stakeholder group. Often 
engineers, field workers, and health agencies have institutional knowledge about events such as 
sewage spills or emergency repairs to pipes that may not have been memorialized in routine 
maintenance records.  
 
 
Box 3.1. Using spatial patterns to eliminate a potential source 
Avalon Beach on Santa Catalina Island, CA shares a harbor with hundreds of moored boats, a 
potential fecal pollution source. Researchers carried out a short-term survey to determine if the boats 
contribute to the beach’s pollution problems. The study aimed to determine if contamination is 
pervasive throughout the harbor (including sites adjacent to boats), or restricted to the shoreline. The 
harbor was sampled during both a rising and falling tide, assuming the net flow of water would be into 
the bay during the rising tide, and out of the bay during the falling tide. Sampling was conducted at 
night because sunlight reduces contamination levels during the day, obscuring spatial patterns that 
may be useful for inferring sources. Investigators found that enterococci and E. coli concentrations 
were highest at the shoreline and low within the bay, refuting the idea that boats are a major source of 
contamination. This information, along with a long-term study of groundwater quality and molecular 
source tracking marker data, led the researchers to conclude that groundwater contaminated by leaky 
sewage infrastructure was polluting the beach. 
For additional information see: Boehm, A.B., Fuhrman, J.A., Mrse, R.D. and Grant, S.B. 2003. Tiered approach 
for identification of a human fecal pollution source at a recreational beach: case study at Avalon Bay, Catalina 
Island, California. Environmental Science and Technology 37(4), 673-680. 
<<PAGE 16>>
12 
 
 
3.3 Examining Temporal FIB Patterns  
In many cases, FIB contamination may be temporally associated with predictable natural 
phenomena, such as precipitation, tides, or seasons. First, evaluate whether the FIB problem is 
associated with storm or non-storm creek flows or occurs year-round. If there is a lagoon, 
information on when the lagoon breaches can be critical for assessing the role of the lagoon; 
lifeguards may record data about the berm status. Rainfall and the resulting stormwater discharge 
is a well-documented FIB source at California beaches and should be the first temporal variable 
examined. Compare the time series of FIB and precipitation to see if peak FIB counts follow 
precipitation events. Confirm this relationship with statistics, for example, a 2x2 contingency 
table test of presence of rainfall in the last three days versus FIB criteria exceedance (both binary 
variables). 
Second, examine seasonality. While seasonality could be associated with weather patterns and 
rain, it might also be tied to specific human or animal activities in the watershed. For instance, in 
watersheds with heavy farming activity, consider whether increases in FIB concentration relate 
to periods of high fertilizer use. Similarly, some watersheds experience seasonal use for 
fairgrounds or horse racing venues, and temporal FIB patterns can elicit whether these are likely 
sources. In addition, bird populations at some beaches fluctuate seasonally due to migration, and 
FIB levels may be correlated to the number of birds.  
Another seasonal factor to consider is whether or not storm drains or creeks were flowing or dry 
on the day the beach was sampled. Many creeks, especially in Southern California, develop a 
sand berm that intermittently blocks the flow of water to the beach, sometimes for many months. 
In addition, storm drains may be physically diverted to the sanitary sewer system during certain 
parts of the year. Statistical tests can help determine whether FIB levels differ among months or 
by other seasonal conditions, such as open-berm versus closed-berm periods. 
Box 3.2. Using a mass balance approach to eliminate a potential source 
At Cowell Beach in Santa Cruz, CA, water flowing from a storm drain near the stairs at the north end 
of the beach was a suspected FIB source. This drain was measured weekly for FIB and flow rate 
during the 2011 and 2012 summer seasons. The mean FIB concentrations in the drain were 2400 
MPN/100 ml (EC) and 2000 MPN /100 ml (ENT), much higher than the mean concentrations at the 
beach of 630 MPN/100 ml (EC) and 230 MPN/100 ml (ENT). The water discharged from the drain at a 
very low rate (~40 L/min). Given the distance between the drain and the beach (400 m), and the 
dilution likely to take place once the drain water entered the ocean, researchers calculated that this 
was not likely a main source of pollution. This conclusion was further supported by salinity data 
collected along with each Cowell Beach sample. On average samples contained ~1% freshwater in 
surf zone samples, suggesting that the freshwater storm drain source could not be responsible for the 
FIB at the beach.1  
 
For additional information see: Russell, T.L., Sassoubre, L.M., Wang, D., Masuda, S., Chen, H., Soetjipto, C., 
Hassaballah, A. and Boehm, A.B. 2013. A coupled modeling and molecular biology approach to microbial 
source tracking at Cowell Beach, Santa Cruz, CA, United States. Environmental Science and Technology 
dx.doi.org/10.1021/es402303w. 
 
<<PAGE 17>>
13 
Third, look for temporal patterns linked to tides. Tidal trends in beach water quality reflect the 
importance of both groundwater and beach-based FIB sources. In addition to increased surface 
water (rivers and creeks) influence at low tide, submarine groundwater discharge (i.e., 
groundwater discharged from a coastal aquifer to the ocean) is typically greater during low tide. 
Higher FIB during low tides may implicate groundwater as a primary source if there are no 
nearby rivers, creeks, or lagoons with discharge modulated by the tide. Beach-based sources, 
such as contaminated sand or FIB-laden beach wrack, would be more influential during high tide 
when most of the beach is inundated with seawater. Thus, higher FIB during high tides may tell 
you to look more closely at sand and wrack as important sources. In addition, spring tides bring 
higher than normal high tides, and lower than normal low tides that can flush out material from 
estuaries and creeks where these sources are present. Performing a correlation analysis with FIB 
concentrations and tide height or tide range will reveal whether and how FIB are associated with 
tides. Other tests can discern differences between FIB counts under categorical tide conditions 
(e.g., rising/falling or spring/neap tides; see Box 3.3).  
Fourth, examine correlation with weather conditions, specifically strong winds and high surf. 
Higher FIB concentrations under high-energy conditions may indicate remobilization of FIB 
reservoirs in beach or nearshore areas. Similar correlative statistics as described above for 
rainfall and tide can be used for these and other weather variables. 
A fifth pattern to examine is diurnal (time-of-day) trends, which can indicate the possibility of 
direct inputs from bathers, whose numbers vary throughout the course of the day. Diurnal 
patterns can also provide information on the potential importance of sunlight in controlling FIB 
concentrations, indicating whether sunlight should be controlled for during any remaining 
sample collection. If so, additional samples should be collected before dawn and then throughout 
the course of the day along with measurements of solar radiation. 
A sixth factor to consider is near-shore ocean currents. Current velocity and direction can be 
modeled at a six kilometer spatial resolution from historical incident wave data measured by the 
Coastal Ocean Currents Monitoring Program (COCMP) stations using High-frequency radar 
(HFRadar) and archived on internet databases. These models provide high temporal resolution 
estimates of current direction at a particular location. 
 
Finally, note when an intermittent contamination pattern does not match any particular temporal 
phenomenon. These intermittent sources can be suggestive of illicit dumping or other hard-to-
detect anthropogenic activity. In other cases, understanding the intermittent nature of the 
problem provides insight for later investigative phases to ensure source-tracking technology is 
deployed at times when the source is present.  
 
 
<<PAGE 18>>
14 
 
 
  
Box 3.3. Example temporal data analysis using FIB 
Researchers compiled FIB data from 60 beaches in Orange and Los Angeles Counties, along with 
information on the time of day the FIB sample was collected. Using the time of day data, they were 
able to use tidal prediction algorithms to determine whether the tide was rising or falling, and whether 
it was spring or neap tide during sample collection. The researchers binned the data according to the 
tidal condition and explored whether FIB differed significantly under various tide conditions using a 
Chi-square test or Fisher’s exact test. They found tidal patterns at 50 of the 60 beaches analyzed. This 
led them to conclude that sources of contamination other than terrestrial runoff (including groundwater, 
sand, and wrack) may be pervasive at these beaches. 
 
For more information see: Boehm, A.B. and S.B. Weisberg. 2005. Tidal forcing of enterococci at marine 
recreational beaches at fortnightly and semidiurnal frequencies. Environmental Science and Technology 
39:5575-5593. 
 
<<PAGE 19>>
15 
CHAPTER 4: (STEP 3) TRADITIONAL METHODS FOR IDENTIFYING LEAKS IN 
SANITARY SEWER AND ON-SITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS  
Verifying integrity of sewage conveyances is a top priority for investigating fecal indicator 
bacteria (FIB) sources to a beach because:  
1) Human sewage carries a high bacterial and human pathogen load, causing it to have a 
high public health risk relative to non-human fecal sources; 
2) Coastal infrastructure is typically more aged (since coastal areas are generally the soonest 
to be developed) and more subject to corrosion from saltwater contact; 
3) Sanitary systems have been found to be responsible for fecal pollution at many beaches; 
and 
4) Methods for testing sanitary system integrity are proven and typically less costly than the 
genetic source identification technologies used in later tiers of this manual. 
 
California has three principal types of sanitary treatment and conveyance systems. In most 
developed areas, California has separate, dedicated stormwater and sewage conveyance systems. 
However, many communities with separate sewer systems also have on-site water treatment 
systems (OWTSs), such as septic systems. OWTSs are more prominent in rural areas. Finally, 
combined sewer overflow systems convey both sewage and stormwater together through a 
common pipe to a regional water treatment facility. Combined sewer overflow systems are least 
common in California and limited to San Francisco and parts of Sacramento. The approaches 
used to test for leakage differ among these systems and are described separately below.  
4.1 Separate Sewage Conveyance Systems 
Several techniques test the integrity of sanitary sewer systems, most prominently dye testing, 
smoke testing, and closed circuit television (CCTV) inspections. Dye testing involves placing 
dye into a portion of the system and then looking for down-system leakage of that dye into 
surrounding surface or groundwater. This is the most versatile method, but often not the one 
routinely used by many sewer system operators.2 
Smoke testing is more complex to conduct, but has the advantage of testing many potential 
sources at once. Whereas dye is placed into individual source locations and then flows down the 
system, smoke is forced into the system and can identify up-system defects, making it 
particularly valuable when there are multiple lateral lines converging in an area or suspected 
illicit connections.  
Sewer system operators most commonly use CCTV for preventive maintenance. It involves 
putting a camera into the conveyance system and provides a direct visual line of evidence. CCTV 
has the advantage of potentially identifying specific defect(s) or cross-connections when 
                                                
2 For more information on common practices used by sewer operators in California see 
http://bacwa.org/Portals/0/Committees/CollectionSystems/Library/SSO%20BMP%20Manual%201%201.pdf. 
 
<<PAGE 20>>
16 
combined with dye testing. However, numerous small defects may not be visually apparent and, 
for source tracking purposes, CCTV is best used as a confirmatory method when dye testing or 
smoke testing has already identified the general origin of the leakage.  
Dye Testing  
Dye testing involves introducing fluorescent dye into a sanitary system to verify its integrity or 
identify defects. It is also used to test the function of OWTSs and detect connectivity between 
these systems and surface waters.  
When testing sanitary collection systems, dye is added upstream of the suspected defect through 
toilets, sinks or directly into the pipe and then detected either visually or by fluorometry. Visual 
detection is standard practice and is often adequate in the case of large leaks or cross-connections 
to storm sewers, but dye from small leaks or dye diluted by ground or surface waters is often 
undetectable by sight. For this reason, use of rhodamine- or fluorescein-based dyes that are 
detectable in very small concentrations using a fluorometer is recommended.3  
In tidally influenced areas, dye testing should be conducted during spring tide conditions, when 
tidal height fluctuates the most. During these events, the increased water flux between the land 
and ocean creates the best opportunity to detect dye that has escaped from the system. Baseline 
water samples to calibrate fluorometric measurements should be collected before dye is 
introduced into sanitary systems through toilets or directly into the line in question during low 
tide. Visual observations and water sampling for fluorometry should be initiated immediately 
following introduction of the dye and continue at set intervals, or continuously using 
instrumentation, over at least two full tidal cycles to allow time for dye to travel through the soil 
into the areas where measurements are taken.  
 
                                                
3 Information on how to dye test sanitary collection systems can be found in: Existing Sewer Evaluation and 
Rehabilitation: WEF Manual of Practice No. FD-6 ASCE/EWRI Manuals and Reports on Engineering Practice No. 
62, Third Edition, WEF Press: Alexandria, Virginia 2009. 
Box 4.1. Example of dye testing to check integrity of a sanitary collection 
system 
Doheny State Beach Park in Dana Point, CA had a history of poor bacterial water quality. 
Initial hypotheses implicated the large resident shorebird population. However, an 
epidemiology study linked illness in swimmers with water contact and human-associated fecal 
markers and viruses had been detected in beach water. This evidence suggested the sanitary 
sewer infrastructure near the beach might be leaking. To test the integrity of the sanitary 
system, rhodamine dye was introduced through toilets in restrooms surrounding the beach 
and the ocean and adjacent creeks were monitored for rhodamine every two hours over the 
next 30 hours. While the dye was never visually detected, fluorometer readings showed that 
the dye flowed to the ocean within hours and was widespread across the beach, indicating 
that there were defects in the sanitary collection system. Subsequent CCTV inspection of the 
gravity collection lines within the park revealed multiple defects and corrective action was 
initiated to restore the integrity of the system. This beach is an example of an obvious FIB 
source (shorebirds) masking an infrastructure problem. 
 
For additional information see Layton et al. In preparation 
<<PAGE 21>>
17 
Dye testing is also useful in detecting cross-connections and/or exfiltration of sanitary sewers to 
the storm sewer system. In this case, dye is introduced into the sanitary sewer upstream of the 
suspected cross-connection or point of exfiltration, as indicated by FIB data. Dye entering the 
storm sewer may be detected visually or through the use of a robotic camera system strategically 
placed in the storm sewer. In cases where sanitary sewage exfiltration into a storm sewer is 
suspected, exercise caution before concluding that no infiltration occurs, as dye diluted by 
groundwater may not be visually detectable. If this is the case, you may want to verify the result 
using fluorometry or a human-associated fecal marker (see Chapter 5). 
 
 
 
You may also use dye to determine which portions of a beach are affected by flow from 
particular sources. In this application, introduce dye upstream of the drainage being studied. 
Visual observation of dye dispersal gives a good general idea of which beach areas are impacted. 
For a more sophisticated analysis, use fluorescence measurements of the initial dye concentration 
as well as water samples taken along the beach over time. Then, use this dilution estimate to 
calculate the likelihood that FIB from the drainage are responsible for the concentrations 
observed at particular locations along the beach. Dye can also be used to infer information about 
water movement at the impacted beach to determine residence time and thus provide insight into 
FIB fluxes needed to maintain specific FIB concentrations at the beach.  
Smoke Testing 
Smoke testing involves isolating a small section of the sewer system and then blowing smoke 
through that section from a manhole (Figure 4.1). If defects exist in either the main sewer pipes 
or the private sewer laterals that serve individual homes and businesses (Figure 4.2), or if there 
are unknown or illegal connections between the sewer and storm drain, smoke will rise to the 
surface and reveal these problems. 
Box 4.2. Example of dye testing to check sanitary sewers exfiltrating into nearby storm sewers  
In Santa Barbara, CA, urban storm drains flowing into creeks during dry weather were found to carry 
high FIB concentrations. Further testing of storm drains in the vicinity of aged sanitary sewers showed 
that DNA-based markers of human waste were present. Investigators hypothesized that the aged 
sanitary sewers were exfiltrating into soils, and that exfiltration was migrating into nearby storm drains, 
i.e., storm drains underneath or parallel to leaking sewers. A follow-up study involved releasing 
rhodamine dye into sanitary sewer manholes at several locations that spatially bracketed the affected 
storm drains. An optical, real time monitoring probe with an automatic data logger (YSI Instruments) 
was deployed into a storm drain manhole at a location both contaminated with FIB and potentially 
integrative based on its location and directions of drainage and sewage flows. They deployed the 
probe over several days to weeks, while downloading data and inspecting it periodically. Within a one- 
to two-week period, they detected exfiltration via a small rhodamine dye peak within the logged probe 
data (Sercu et al., ES&T, 2011). This confirmed the bracketed area was problematic for sewage 
exfiltration, and it was prioritized for sewer slip-lining and replacement by the City. The City 
incorporated this dye testing method into an urban drain microbial source tracking guide published at 
http://www.santabarbaraca.gov/civicax/filebank/blobdload.aspx?BlobID=16722. 
 
For more information see: Sercu, B., Van De Werfhorst, L. C., Murray, J. L. S., and Holden, P. A. 2011. 
Environmental Science and Technology 45:7151-7157. 
<<PAGE 22>>
18 
Smoke testing is more cumbersome, and therefore generally less desirable, than dye testing but 
can be valuable for evaluating multiple lateral lines into a conveyance system. Whereas dye 
testing would require dye placement into each home, the positive pressure associated with smoke 
testing forces the tracer upstream in the system and allows simultaneous evaluation of 
connections from multiple houses in a region. Smoke testing can also be valuable to check for 
cross-connections by blowing smoke into the drainage system. If there is a direct cross-
connection from a particular residence or building, smoke will be seen rising from the drain 
vents of that structure (See example, Box 4.3). 
 
   
Figure 4.1. Smoke testing in a sewer main. Figure 4.2. Smoke rising from a faulty 
 lateral line. 
 
 
Box 4.3. Example of smoke testing to identify and confirm a suspected cross-connection 
High Enterococcus (ENT) counts resulted in repeated advisories at a recreational site on the Chesapeake 
Bay. Intensive sampling identified a “hot spot” in the water adjacent to a storm drain at one end of the 
beach. Most samples collected from both the hot spot and storm drain were positive for a human-
associated fecal marker (BacHum). Long-term storm drain sampling at spring low tides, the only time the 
outfall was available for sampling, revealed high concentrations of Enterococcus (450 CFU/100 mL to 
>3,000 CFU/100 mL). The advisories were most frequent if sampling occurred on the outgoing tide; and 
investigators suspected a large home subdivided into rental apartments in line with the storm drain as the 
source. Denial of access by the property owner precluded a dye test, so a smoke generator and fan were 
used to blow smoke into the storm drain during a low spring tide. The emission of smoke from plumbing 
fixtures in the building demonstrated a direct connection. Repairing the sewer line from the house and 
connecting it to the sanitary sewer quickly reduced the ENT counts below detection limits in subsequent 
samplings. No beach advisories have occurred at that location since the repair was made. 
 
Personal Communication: Dr. Charles Hagedorn, Virginia Tech, Department of Crop & Soil Environmental 
Sciences 
 
  

<<PAGE 23>>
19 
Closed Circuit Television 
There are two basic types of Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) systems. Both are used to 
perform routine and investigatory inspections on the gravity portion of sanitary and storm water 
collection systems, and may also help locate defects in sanitary pipes when FIB spatial patterns 
suggest a problem in a specific area. The first type consists of a high-pressure water jet and 
camera on a flexible cable. The second type uses a self-propelled robotized camera system 
designed to operate remotely in confined space. 
The cabled system cleans debris and biofilm off the inside of pipes with a water jet so the camera 
can take video images of the pipes’ inner surface lumen. This unit detects large defects such as 
offsets in pipe ends caused by root intrusions or shifting substrate. It also detects smaller cracks 
that, when numerous, may discharge a substantial amount of sewage into groundwater. The 
larger robotized system can go into confined space to inspect large pipes, but also applies to 
applications such as visually detecting cross-connections to storm sewers when dye is introduced 
into the sanitary sewer system (Box 4.4). 
When a sewer pipe is inspected with CCTV, the technician should be recording observations in 
detail. This data can be used to prioritize needed improvements. Storm drain pipes can also be 
inspected using CCTV to search for evidence of cross-connections such as sewage debris or to 
detect dye introduced into the sanitary sewer. 
While useful, CCTV systems often miss small defects. Thus, they are generally preferred as a 
confirmatory tool to identify specific leaks after dye or smoke testing finds a leak in the area. 
Alternatively, CCTV may be used as an initial screening tool, particularly for utilities that have 
the equipment readily available, but findings should be confirmed with dye testing when FIB 
concentrations suggest a concern in the area.4  
Alternative methods 
In addition to the traditional methods mentioned above for identifying leaks in sewer systems 
and OWTSs, new tools are also emerging. One example is the use of canine scent tracking. 
Canines excel at scent detection and scent discrimination, and are able to focus on their trained 
target and ignore other sources. Canines have been trained and used successfully to detect a wide 
variety of scent sources (e.g. pests, imported species, some types of cancer, etc.). In recent years, 
canines have also been trained to detect municipal wastewater, and initial field evaluation of the 
method appears promising (see Box 4.5.). 
 
                                                
4 Find specific information on the use and proper operation of CCTV systems at: 
http://bacwa.org/Portals/0/Committees/CollectionSystems/Library/SSO%20BMP%20Manual%201%201.pdf. 
<<PAGE 24>>
20 
 
4.2 On-Site Water Treatment Systems  
Once the location of OWTSs are identified and cross-referenced to FIB data in the region to 
identify the most suspect OWTS sources, dye testing is the preferred option for investigation. 
Standard practice looks for pooling of dyed water on the surface or entering waterways, but like 
sanitary sewer dye testing, fluorometry boosts sensitivity.5  Dye pulse size and delivery 
mechanisms, leach field size, soil type, and soil permeability all affect dye testing of OWTSs. 
For best results, an experienced hydrology team should conduct these tests.  
Self-contained OWTS units are generally located entirely on private land and the local 
landowner may not grant access to their system for introducing dye. Some municipalities have 
ordinances that compel landowners to allow local officials to inspect OWTSs after proper notice. 
In areas where such ordinances do not exist, local public health officials and Water Boards are 
empowered to force inspection and may disallow use of the system, but only after a known or 
suspected public health threat or a connection to contaminated surface waters has been 
identified.6  
If a landowner refuses access, then indirect offsite methods would be necessary to investigate the 
source. In locations with sparse OWTS density and unlikely potential for other human sources in 
the area, this typically means using either a human genetic marker and/or chemical testing as 
outlined in Chapter 5. In areas with a high OWTS density, or other potential alternative human 
fecal sources, the more complex community based methods outlined in Chapter 7 may be useful. 
                                                
5 Find information on general procedures to dye test OWTS at: http://www.stahi.org/septic-dye-test-
protocol.html.For detailed technical information on this topic see: Lalor, M. and Pitt, R. 1999. Use of Tracers to 
Identify Sources of Contamination in Dry Weather Flow. Watershed Protection Techniques 3(1). 
6 For additional information on the State Water Resources Control Board’s OWTS policy see: 
http://www.waterboards.ca.gov/water_issues/programs/owts/board_adopted_policy.shtml 
Box 4.5. Using canine scent tracking to screen for human waste pollution 
An evaluation of canine scent tracking as a field approach for surveying human fecal contamination 
was conducted in Santa Barbara, CA. Two dogs had been trained to respond to the scent of municipal 
wastewater. In this study, canine response to water inside storm drains was later compared to results 
from fecal indicator bacteria (FIB), and chemical and DNA-based human fecal marker assays. The 
dogs responded positively (70% and 100%) at field sites where water samples were later confirmed in 
the lab as contaminated with human feces. Further, when both dogs indicated a negative response, 
tests for human fecal markers were negative. An advantage of canine scent tracking is that it provides 
instant, on the ground results. For example, in this study the dogs were used for a storm drain 
diversion structure to indicate the upstream location of human fecal contamination. The dogs surveyed 
all upstream branches of the storm drain system and quickly located a likely origin of contamination 
related to a surcharging sanitary sewage lift station. Visual evidence of the surcharge entering the 
adjacent storm drain was gathered using televising and dye studies. Human waste was then confirmed 
for sampled storm drain water using the human-waste assays. Canine scent tracking is a promising 
tool that may be useful for screening and prioritizing sampling sites before DNA-based and other 
similarly expensive assays are used to confirm human fecal contamination.  
For more information see: Van De Werfhorst, L. C., Murray, J. L. S., Reynolds, S., Reynolds, K., and Holden, P. 
A. Canine scent detection and microbial source tracking of human waste contamination in storm drains, In 
press, Water Environment Research. 
<<PAGE 25>>
21 
 
 
  
Box 4.4. Identifying leaking sewer laterals with a robotic camera and fluorescent dye  
During a routine survey of Mission Creek in Santa Barbara, degraded toilet paper and brown sludge 
were observed in water flowing from a storm drain. In addition, FIB counts from outfall samples were 
consistently high and “sewer corn” kernels were frequently observed at the outfall. Investigators 
hypothesized that fecal pollution was entering the storm drain directly and tested it using two tools: a 
camera and a fluorescent dye. They first inspected the storm drain interior using a CCTV camera 
mounted on a robotic vehicle (below left). Images showed the old drain had a brick and mortar roof, 
plus flowing water (below right). Suspicions of sewage input were confirmed when the camera found 
two locations with water dripping into the storm drain.  
 
  
 
 
Although the evidence pointed to a sewer leak, it was difficult to visualize how solids such as toilet 
paper and baby wipes could be forced through the small crack. The second step tested for connections 
by adding fluorescent green dye to the toilets of nearby businesses. After a few flushes, a bright green 
stream flowed out of the storm drain and into a creek ( above left ). With the camera in the storm drain 
trained on the dye, a large void appeared that allowed solids to enter the drain. A similar procedure 
identified a second leak, and private property owners replaced the leaking sewer laterals with new pipe 
(above right) within 24 hours of confirming the source. Following the repairs, no water flowed from the 
drain outfall, demonstrating proper identification and remediation of the fecal pollution source. 
<<PAGE 26>>
22 
CHAPTER 5: (STEP 4) INDICATORS OF HUMAN FECAL POLLUTION 
Source identification efforts typically place the highest priority on evaluating whether human 
fecal material contributes significantly to the FIB load, as human fecal material contains a 
greater number of human pathogens than other fecal sources and thus represents the greatest 
potential health threat. The traditional technologies in Chapter 4 less effectively identify small 
leaks from sanitary sewers, undocumented pipes, or leaking septic systems, as well as direct 
deposits potentially associated with a homeless encampment, leading to a need for alternative 
technology.  
This phase of investigation involves measuring human-specific source markers. These markers 
detect regions of genetic material in fecal bacteria associated with human hosts, using 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) techniques. These methods demonstrate both 
sensitivity and specificity to human fecal material. While bacterial markers usually suffice to 
verify the presence of human material, in some circumstances results may require supplementary 
confirmation with either direct human pathogen measurements (e.g., viruses) or chemical 
markers. The remainder of this chapter describes the appropriate tools in each category and 
explains when use of more than one tool might be warranted.  
5.1 Bacterial Markers 
Human-associated bacterial source markers are emphasized at this stage not only based on their 
superior performance characteristics, but also due to their relatively low cost and ease of use. 
The qPCR technology has been widely used for medical applications in public health 
laboratories for many years. In addition, the US EPA recently released a qPCR method as a tool 
for rapid measurement of FIB in beach water samples. While buying the equipment and setting 
up a lab to perform qPCR requires an initial capital investment (approximately $100K), the 
subsequent cost for supplies totals roughly $50 per sample and a competent technician can 
process more than 40 samples in one day (following DNA extraction). (A commercial laboratory 
may charge tens to hundreds of dollars per sample; prices will vary depending on the company, 
location, and number of samples.) Moreover, the EPA is developing a standard method for 
human-associated qPCR markers, based largely on the standard operating procedures (SOPs) 
developed during the SIPP method evaluation study (Appendices A4 and A5). These factors will 
likely increase access to the technology. 
Researchers have developed more than a dozen human markers over the last decade, but one of 
these, HF183 Taqman®,  performed best overall in method evaluation studies.7 A slightly less 
sensitive marker, HumM2, also performed well. Both of these markers target Bacteroides 
bacteria in human fecal material. This group of bacteria consistently exhibits host-associated 
gene sequences. In evaluating human-associated markers, studies have evaluated method 
sensitivity (i.e., does the method detect human material when it is present in the sample?) and 
specificity (i.e., does it also detect other fecal sources?).  
                                                
7 Layton, B.A., Cao, Y., Ebentier, D.L., et al. 2013. Performance of human fecal anaerobe-associated PCR-based 
assays in a multi-laboratory method evaluation study. Water Research 47 (18), 6897–6908. 
 
<<PAGE 27>>
23 
The HF183 Taqman marker (Appendix A4) is the best starting point for detecting human fecal 
material because it provides the best combination of sensitivity and specificity. However, 
although it performs highest among other markers on sensitivity, it has been shown to 
occasionally detect (“cross-react” with) chicken or dog feces. If those sources pose a concern in 
the watershed, or if managers simply desire to add certainty about the results, HF183 can be 
paired with HumM2.  
5.2 Human Viral Markers 
While human-associated bacterial markers typically suffice for this phase, the source 
identification effort may warrant use of an even more specific marker, for example when cross-
reactivity of human-associated bacterial markers occurs. The high cost of mitigation might also 
justify additional verification testing to confirm the presence of human fecal material, 
particularly municipal sewage.  
Human virus measurement represents an independent approach to verify human bacterial marker 
results. Several methods detect viruses excreted in feces and/or urine with high specificity to 
human waste and almost no cross-reactivity with other sources. The downside of these methods 
is relative insensitivity, despite continuing efforts by researchers to improve them. This problem 
stems from very low-density occurrence of viruses in the environment and difficulty 
concentrating them efficiently with current technology. Detection may be enhanced by 
concentrating large volumes of water, up to 1000 times more water than the 100 mL sample 
typically used for bacterial source markers, but this adds logistical challenges and expense as 
water must be processed on-site or transported to the laboratory in large volumes. Thus, the 
additional cost of concentration, which adds hundreds of dollars per sample, and logistical 
challenges of measuring viruses must be weighed against the cost of remediation and the weight 
of evidence needed. 
Among the virus methods, markers for DNA viruses, such as human adenovirus and human 
polyomavirus, are among the more sensitive and robust. These viruses are fairly widespread 
among humans, and a sizable portion of the population sheds polyomaviruses passively. In 
addition, the DNA genomes of these viruses are less labile than those of common human enteric 
viruses with RNA genomes, which may make them more resistant to environmental degradation 
and therefore easier to detect. However, due to the specialized steps required and ongoing 
research to improve concentration and recovery of viruses from water, the authors recommend 
that only an experienced research laboratory perform these methods. 
5.3 Chemical Source Tracking 
A third independent approach to evaluate environmental water for presence of human fecal 
material measures chemicals relatively specific to wastewater and septage. Such chemicals 
include optical brighteners used in laundry detergents; caffeine; fecal sterols, which are 
metabolic byproducts of human digestion processes; and a metabolite of nicotine (cotinine) 
excreted by tobacco users. However, these methods are rarely used because their analytes are 
quickly diluted to levels below detection limits once the waste stream enters the ambient 
environment. Moreover, the cost to measure the organic chemicals, such as sterols, surpasses that 
of traditional cultivable bacteria indicators. However, for some laboratories (e.g., sanitation 
districts) with the necessary instruments for detailed chemical analysis, chemical methods cost 
<<PAGE 28>>
24 
less than qPCR-based assessment of human waste DNA markers. Thus, some chemical markers 
might be useful for independently confirming human waste inputs in a cost-effective manner.  
One chemical source tracking method previously used in California is the Enzyme‐Linked 
Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) test to detect caffeine and cotinine. The ELISA technique 
involves a biochemical assay to detect the presence of an antibody or antigen in a sample. Kits to 
measure caffeine and cotinine are commercially available, reasonably priced, and easy to use. An 
additional aliquot of the sample can be filtered in the field during sample collection for FIB and 
DNA-based analysis. The filtrate can then be stored frozen until investigators have decided 
whether or not to analyze for chemical markers. 
 
 
 
Another chemical detection tool, optical brighteners (OBs), may be useful in rare circumstances 
to identify water flowing from straight pipes or septic systems. The advantage of OBs is easy 
measurement in the field with a handheld fluorometer, providing near real-time and inexpensive 
signal tracking, which cannot be said of any other method above. This allows an investigator to 
walk a stream, test the water at periodic intervals, and sample adaptively based on presence of 
the OB signal to better geographically pinpoint the source. However, OB detection is not as 
sensitive as most microbial assessments, and real-time source tracking efforts will succeed only 
if the OB concentration produces a measurable signal. Additionally, OBs may be absent from 
households using certain environmentally friendly detergents that do not contain these additives. 
Because of these limitations, OB analysis is mainly useful as an additional piece of information 
to achieve a greater weight of evidence and should not be relied upon as the sole detection 
method for human fecal pollution.  
Nitrate is another chemical marker sometimes useful in diagnosing flow from septic systems into 
surface water. In a properly working septic system, almost all nitrogen entering the soil is 
quickly converted to nitrate by soil microbes. Despite the fact that nitrate is always found in 
septic discharges and relatively cheap to measure, the presence of nitrate in surface water does 
not guarantee that it came from a septic system, as it is also found in high concentrations in 
Box 5.1. Using caffeine and cotinine markers to confirm human waste in storm drains 
flowing to coastal creeks during dry weather 
The lower Laguna watershed in Santa Barbara, CA, had high concentrations of FIB in creek locations 
flowing into a coastal lagoon and then to the beach. Upstream storm drains tested during dry weather 
carried sewage contamination as indicated by DNA-based human markers. At locations with high 
bacterial indicator concentrations, caffeine and cotinine concentrations correlated with one another as 
well as with DNA-based markers of human waste. These positive results for chemical evidence of 
human waste provided further confirmation that human inputs, and not cross-reaction of PCR primers 
with other fecal sources, were causing high DNA-based human markers in the drains. The locations 
of highest contamination were further investigated to locate possible origins. While exact spatial 
sources were not determined, the City prioritized this area for sewer rehabilitation and initiated the 
project. 
 
For additional information see Holden, Patricia et al. In preparation 
<<PAGE 29>>
25 
runoff containing fertilizers applied to crops and lawns. Further, atmospheric deposition from 
combustion of fossil fuels can also introduce nitrate to surface waters. Therefore, one should 
think twice before considering nitrate as a source tracking indicator in areas with known aerial 
deposition, such as the Los Angeles metropolitan area. As with OBs, the presence of nitrates 
must be considered only as another piece of information to add to the weight of evidence, rather 
than an irrefutable confirmation of connectivity between septic tanks and surface waters.  
  
<<PAGE 30>>
26 
CHAPTER 6: (STEP 5) NON-HUMAN SOURCE-ASSOCIATED MARKERS 
Employing non-human source-associated markers is the next step when source identification 
tiers 1–4 (FIB data, infrastructure investigations, and human-associated markers) have suggested 
that human fecal contamination is not the dominant source. Only a limited number of the most 
common species have source-associated markers available, but many feature both sensitivity and 
specificity for their targets. This chapter provides guidance for selecting and applying these 
tools.  
6.1 Selecting Appropriate Markers  
Reliable source-associated fecal markers are currently available for cattle, dogs, pigs, horses, and 
gulls. Other, more general markers target ruminants and other waterfowl. Selecting which non-
human source-associated marker to use depends on the hypothesized sources identified during 
the information-gathering phase of the study (Chapter 2). Practitioners can choose one or 
multiple markers as appropriate to answer the question(s) at hand. To save cost, stored DNA 
extracts used to conduct analysis for human-associated markers may be re-analyzed with 
additional markers. Additional samples may need to be collected to ensure adequate spatial and 
temporal coverage. 
Given a limited budget, you must balance the need to collect an adequate number of samples 
with the expense of gaining information about an additional source. Take care to run multiple 
markers only when host sources are numerous enough in the watershed to warrant the added 
effort and expense. For example, combining non-human markers would be helpful at an off-leash 
dog beach that also has a resident gull population (Box 6.1). In this case, managers might 
hypothesize that both sources are contributing FIB to the water and seek to better isolate the most 
significant source.  
 
 
  
Box 6.1 Use of multiple nonhuman markers to identify significant FIB sources 
Sampling at Arroyo Burro Beach in Santa Barbara, CA revealed an intermittently breaching lagoon 
as the dominant source of dry weather FIB to the surf zone. Human sources in the lagoon and 
downstream creeks feeding the lagoon were ruled out using the HF183 and HumM2 markers. The 
DogBact and Gull2 markers implicated dogs and gulls as the likely nonhuman sources at this 
beach. While gull markers were detected at low levels in the surf zone and lagoon, dog markers 
correlated highly with FIB in the surf zone. Dog markers were also present in the lagoon and at a 
downstream creek location. Load calculations revealed that dog markers measured in the surf 
zone and lagoon came primarily from the upstream creek. Follow-up actions taken by the City of 
Santa Barbara helped to limit the input of dog feces from homeowners living along this creek. 
For additional information, see Ervin et al. In preparation. 
<<PAGE 31>>
27 
6.2 Choosing Appropriate Non-Human Source-Associated Fecal Markers 
All markers described in this chapter use PCR. The majority of markers use quantitative PCR 
(qPCR), meaning they provide information about the relative amount of target material in a 
particular water sample. Others, termed “end-point” or conventional PCR, provide only 
qualitative (presence or absence) data. When quantitative and end-point PCR assays both exist 
for a particular source, the quantitative assay is always preferred. Aside from providing 
quantitative information about the target in a water sample, the design of qPCR assays adds 
additional sensitivity and specificity that is not available in non-quantitative PCR methods. 
This section describes recommended markers selected from among the suite of non-human 
source-associated markers currently published for use in MST. It relies heavily on the results of 
the SIPP MST Method Evaluation Study, which tested method performance with fecal material 
collected throughout California, although other validation data was also taken into 
consideration.8  
Dog-Associated Fecal Markers 
At present, several dog-associated qPCR and end-point PCR assays have been published. Two of 
these have been evaluated for use in California, DogBact and BacCan-UCD, and perform equally 
well when dogs are a potential fecal source. Though highly sensitive and specific, both methods 
occasionally cross-react with other species. Find the SOP for these two recommended methods in 
Appendix A6 and A7. 
Cow/Ruminant Markers 
Multiple cow- and ruminant-associated DNA marker assays have been developed in the last 
decade and several evaluation studies have been conducted to validate their performance. Three 
qPCR assays have consistently performed well in locales around the world: BacR, CowM2, and 
Rum2Bac. Among these, CowM2 is the recommended cattle marker because it will become an 
EPA-approved method in the near future. When you suspect a non-bovine ruminant fecal source, 
such as deer or goats, use Rum2Bac instead of CowM2. When both cattle and other ruminants 
live in the watershed, apply both CowM2 and Rum2Bac. Rum2Bac occasionally demonstrated 
false positive results with septage, so in watersheds with both septage and ruminant sources, 
conclusively rule out septage before employing Rum2Bac. Find the SOPs for CowM2 and 
Rum2Bac in Appendices A8 and A9, respectively. 
Pig Markers 
Relatively few pig-specific markers have been developed to date. Two pig markers, one based on 
conventional PCR (PF163) and one quantitative (Pig2Bac), have been tested for use in 
California. Due to its demonstrated high sensitivity, Pig2Bac is the recommended method for 
detection of pig feces. Note that Pig2Bac sometimes cross-reacts with human/septage and dog 
                                                
8 Detailed information about the SIPP study can be found at 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0043135413005496.  
 
<<PAGE 32>>
28 
feces, so it works best when those sources have been ruled out. Locate the SOP for this method 
in Appendix A10. 
Horse Markers 
Horse-associated markers are relatively uncommon. To date, only two have been published and 
only one conventional PCR-based horse marker (HoF597) has been validated in California. Its 
use is recommended when horses are present in the watershed and all other potential sources 
have been ruled out. It performed well in the SIPP study, but does not show as much sensitivity 
as most other host-associated assays. The other recently developed quantitative horse assay has 
not yet been thoroughly evaluated. As such, the recommended conventional horse marker SOP is 
given in Appendix A11. 
Gull Markers 
The MST toolbox gained host-associated markers targeting gulls and other water birds fairly 
recently. Selecting from a number of sea bird-associated assays published to date, the SIPP study 
evaluated four for use in California. Of these four, the Gull2 Taqman and LeeSeaGull markers 
are best for routine use because they consistently displayed sensitivity and specificity across 
laboratories. All available bird markers will detect pigeon and sometimes goose feces as well as 
gull. Further, the host distribution of the bird marker target bacterium (Catellicoccus 
marimammaliam) among all the various species of shorebirds is unknown. Thus the Gull2 and 
LeeSeaGull markers should be considered general “bird” assays and not necessarily specific to 
gulls. Several new bird-associated MST assays developed since the SIPP study was conducted 
may prove superior to Gull2 and LeeSeaGull, but require a thorough evaluation. Therefore, the 
two evaluated and recommended Gull2 Taqman and LeeSeaGull SOPs are presented in 
Appendices A12 and A13. 
 
  
<<PAGE 33>>
29 
CHAPTER 7: (STEP 6) MICROBIAL COMMUNITY ANALYSIS 
Microbial community analysis (MCA) methods can either complement the techniques described 
in the previous chapters, or fill in gaps where the prior methods do not achieve the intended MST 
goals. However, they remain in a somewhat experimental state as only limited studies illustrate 
their utility in field settings. Unlike the single marker methods (in Chapters 5 and 6) that measure 
one microorganism or group of microorganisms at a time, MCA uses a set of tools to 
simultaneously provide information about the entire microbial community present in a sample. 
MCA can operate in a library-dependent fashion, where patterns in environmental samples are 
compared to a “library” of local reference samples taken from suspected sources, or a library-
independent fashion, in which profiles among environmental samples are compared to discern 
spatial and temporal gradients. 
MCA offers added benefits in MST scenarios where:  
1) Single-source markers have not yet been developed for a suspected fecal source (e.g. 
chicken, deer, or goose). In the absence of a host-specific marker, MCA may match the 
pattern of a hypothesized source to the pattern in DNA of sampled waters. Because MCA 
methods first characterize the microbial communities in the suspected sources and then 
compare them with unknown sample communities, their source identification capacity is 
not restricted to the single marker methods already developed, or by the need to perform 
multiple single marker assays for multiple sources. The suspected source can be any 
source for which a reference sample can be obtained.  
2) A host-associated marker spans multiple sources that need to be distinguished for 
management purposes. For instance, when a human marker is found in the watershed, 
practitioners may seek to determine whether the fecal material originated from sewage, 
septage, or stool (e.g., a homeless encampment). An MCA analysis may make this 
differentiation possible because, according to laboratory analyses by SIPP and other 
studies, the overall microbial communities differ among these three human sources.  
3) Further evidence (other than FIB detection) is needed to determine if non-fecal sources 
are major contributors of FIB loading to water. Microbial communities originating from 
non-fecal sources such as storm drain biofilms, sand, and algal wrack could be compared 
to those found in the receiving waters. High similarity would provide added evidence that 
the microbes in the water originated from the sand or wrack, for example, rather than 
from fecal sources. However, neither laboratory validation nor field demonstration has 
been conducted for this application.  
4) Further evidence (other than relative magnitudes of FIB or marker signals) is needed to 
identify spatial gradients of fecal pollution. Microbial community analysis integrates 
source types and loading information using multivariate data analysis and display 
approaches, allowing observation of the influence of waste inputs on receiving waters 
over space and time. The influence of waste inputs on receiving water community 
composition attenuates with distance away from the physical location of the fecal source, 
as demonstrated in a MST field study in Santa Barbara (see Box 7.1). 
<<PAGE 34>>
30 
While MCA may complement single marker methods in these scenarios, its application to MST 
is still in its infancy, making it more appropriate as a late tier tool. Some MCA limitations 
include: 
1) Dramatically higher cost. The processing cost per sample exceeds that of methods 
described earlier since extra laboratory steps remain after performing basic PCR. In 
addition, it carries a higher labor cost because MCA data analysis requires a high level of 
expertise and/or computing power. 
2) Less accessibility. While many local processing laboratories now have the qPCR 
technology required to perform single marker methods (which matches the EPA-
approved technology for rapid FIB processing), most labs do not have the microarray 
readers or genetic sequencing equipment required for MCA. Moreover, the advanced data 
analysis methods to interpret community data often require specialized software and 
training. In addition, fewer field studies have modeled MCA application retrospectively. 
As such, most MCA applications at present will require collaboration with a research 
laboratory, which may add cost and delays in developing contractual relationships.  
3) Lower sensitivity. Low-resolution community profiles (such as those provided by 
fingerprinting methods) usually do not detect minor fecal sources influencing the 
environmental water samples. This relatively low sensitivity makes MCA methods 
inappropriate for management applications where high analytical sensitivity is preferred, 
e.g., for detecting very low levels of human waste. Although high-resolution community 
profiles, (such as those provided by PhyloChip or, even better, next-generation 
sequencing,) may achieve higher sensitivity, researchers are still actively developing 
suitable bioinformatics tools that can mine such high-resolution profiles.  
Even with these limitations, MCA represents a very dynamic research area experiencing rapid 
development in many aspects: improved molecular technology to simultaneously measure the 
entire community with high resolution, bioinformatic tools enabling faster and more 
sophisticated data analysis, and more field implementation case studies. These developments will 
likely reduce cost and improve accessibility and sensitivity, imbuing MCA with the potential to 
become a universal MST tool for all sources. Nevertheless, due to data comprehensiveness and 
analysis complexity, MCA will still need to be conducted in collaboration with an experienced 
research lab in the foreseeable future. The following sections of this chapter will expand on 
describing the existing MCA technology and considerations for using MCA in MST.  
  
<<PAGE 35>>
31 
7.1 Types of Microbial Community Analysis Methods  
Three types of microbial community analysis methods have been tested for MST: community 
fingerprinting, such as terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism (TRFLP); microarrays 
such as PhyloChip; and next generation DNA sequencing, such as Illumina sequencing. While 
all three approaches rely on DNA amplified by PCR to assess microbial community composition, 
they differ in the technology used for detection and level of resolution. Even more than for single 
marker methods, data analysis is an integral part of MCA methods, and data analysis choices 
greatly affect how well MCA performs for MST. A simple flow diagram depicts the MCA MST 
process in Figure 7.1. The following paragraphs describe each MCA method separately.  
 
 
Figure 7.1. Flow diagram illustrating the process of using MCA for MST.  

<<PAGE 36>>
32 
 
PhyloChip uses a proprietarily manufactured DNA microarray chip containing 1.1 million probes 
that target all known bacterial and archaeal taxa. When a matching DNA sequence binds to a 
probe, it fluoresces, producing a detectable signal. The pattern resulting from sample DNA 
bound to the probes can be used to identify bacteria and archaea (at various taxonomic levels), 
including some potential pathogens. This method uses multivariate statistical methods (like 
TRFLP), plus a customized host identifier data analysis approach, to detect reference patterns or 
host-specific taxa in water samples.  
 
 
Next-generation sequencing (e.g., Illumina, pyrosequencing) identifies patterns and abundances 
of microbial DNA sequences in reference samples, then detects these signatures within the more 
diverse community present in environmental water. Technological improvements in this field 
continue to boost the number of sequence reads produced from an individual sample. These 
improvements have the potential to drastically increase resolution by incorporating many 
millions of reads per sample.  
 
Box 7.1. Example of a TRFLP integrated community analysis approach 
East Beach in Santa Barbara, CA, had several potential FIB sources, including a creek with a tidal 
lagoon and dry weather flow from a storm drain that was previously determined to contain human 
contamination. Using TRFLP, the bacterial communities from environmental samples were compared 
to reference samples from fecal sources in the watershed (sewage; human, gull, and raccoon feces). 
Statistical analysis clearly distinguished the microbial communities of each sources, revealing a spatial 
and compositional gradient (i.e., ocean to lagoon to urban creek/storm drain to sewage), and 
confirming the presence of human contamination in samples positive for a human-associated qPCR 
marker. 
For additional information see: Cao. Y., Van De Werfhorst, L.C., Sercu, B., Murray, J.L. S., and Holden, P.A. 
2011. Application of an integrated community analysis approach for microbial source tracking in a coastal 
creek. Environmental Science & Technology 45 (17) 7195-7201. 
Box 7.2. Application of PhyloChip to discriminate between fecal pollution sources 
Two field scenarios with known contamination sources were used to evaluate the application of 
PhyloChip for source identification in marine waters. The first was a 720,000 gallon sewage spill in 
Richardson Bay (Sausalito, CA). The second was at Campbell Cove (Bodega Bay, CA), a recreational 
beach where previous MST results indicated contamination likely came from gulls. Samples that 
exceeded regulatory enterococci limits (>104 MPN/100 ml single sample, >35 MPN/100 ml geometric 
mean) were analyzed via PhyloChip to determine if they contained previously identified microbial taxa 
associated with humans, birds, or grazing animals. The Richardson Bay results detected almost all of 
the human identifier taxa and very few bird or grazer identifier taxa. Campbell Cove findings showed 
very few grazer or human identifier taxa but found a significant level of bird identifier taxa. 
For additional information see: Dubinsky, E.A., Esmaili, L., Hulls, J.R., Cao, Y., Griffith, J.F., and Andersen, 
G.L. 2012. Application of phylogenetic microarray analysis to discriminate sources of fecal pollution, 
Environmental Science & Technology 46 (8), 4340-4347. 
<<PAGE 37>>
33 
 
 
7.2 Current State of Development and Method Recommendations 
Application of any MCA method comes with trade-offs, as each has its own advantages and 
drawbacks. Of the three methods discussed in the prior section, TRFLP is the most economical 
and well understood, both in terms of the technology needed to perform the method and the level 
of expertise and computing power required to conduct data analysis. It is also the coarsest 
method in terms of its ability to resolve sources from complex samples, as it does not provide 
any additional information beyond the length and abundance of each DNA fragment. However, a 
recently developed iteration of the method using an additional primer set targeting Bacteroidales 
has enhanced the resolution of TRFLP as a source identification tool. 
DNA microarray technology, such as that used for PhyloChip, is also fairly well studied. The 
number and redundancy of the probes provide high resolution and the ability to detect multiple 
sources in complex samples. However, the method costs more than TRFLP and, given a limited 
budget, could restrict users to a more limited reference database and reduced number of analyzed 
samples. Further, only two laboratories currently perform the method (one research and one 
commercial), which may hinder access. 
Next-generation sequencing, the newest of the MCA methods, has the greatest potential to 
resolve multiple sources in complex samples. However, the next-generation sequencing field is 
still rapidly evolving. While producing millions of sequence reads per sample costs relatively 
little, data analysis currently creates a bottleneck. Computing power and bioinformatics expertise 
in working with very large and complex genomic datasets mainly exist in research laboratories. 
Despite these limitations, as computing capacity and the ability to automate data analysis 
improve, this technology will likely usurp the other methods. 
All three of these methods performed nearly equally well in the SIPP method evaluation study, 
but the research team presently recommends TRFLP. This method is the least expensive of the 
three options, yet yields an acceptable level of resolution. Other techniques are likely to become 
more automated and cost-effective over time. Application of MCA will most likely require 
partnering with a research laboratory with specialized expertise. This type of partnership will 
provide further advice as to changes in the field and the most cost-effective technology.  
  
Box 7.3. Use of next generation sequencing to determine fecal sources in a watershed 
In this example, researchers used next generation sequencing to identify patterns in key taxa from 
human and animal fecal material and search for their presence in freshwater samples from the 
Yeongsan river basin (Jeonnam Province, South Korea). Sites included an urbanized agricultural 
location, a location with no major industrial influence, and a typical agricultural location. Analysis 
revealed the likely sources of fecal contamination to be swine and humans. 
For more information see: Unno, T., Jang, J., Han, D., Kim, J.H., Sadowsky, M.J., Kim, O.-S., Chun, J. and Hur, 
H.-G. 2010. Use of barcoded pyrosequencing and shared OTUs to determine sources of fecal bacteria in 
watersheds. Environmental Science & Technology 44 (20), 7777-7782. 
<<PAGE 38>>
34 
CHAPTER 8: STUDY DESIGN 
Designing a well-reasoned plan for where and when to sample rivals the importance of method 
selection in achieving an accurate study outcome. No single study design will apply to all 
circumstances and levels of certainty. In fact, in some cases the low cost of potential 
management solutions makes it more cost-effective to implement them on a trial basis before 
spending extra money on monitoring to add certainty about the source. Alternatively, a 
comprehensive design involving multiple phases and MST methods may be required if the 
outcome has compliance or litigation implications. While study design will differ based on the 
circumstances, a sound design arises from several guiding principles as described below.  
In most cases, an MST study should proceed with an iterative or phased sampling approach. 
Evaluate hypotheses one at a time, starting with those most relevant to public health protection. 
After ruling out a hypothesis, conduct additional analyses or sampling to test the next most likely 
hypothesis. The SIPP case studies (at Cowell Beach, Arroyo Burro Beach, Topanga State Beach, 
and Doheny State Beach) serve as examples of this phased approach; find references to these and 
other field studies in the Further Reading section of this manual. 
8.1 Sampling Plan Design 
When developing a study plan, seek to answer five key questions: 
1) How many samples should be collected? 
2) Which locations should be sampled?  
3) When should sampling take place?  
4) Which analytical methods should be used? 
5) What level of redundancy of markers is required?  
The number of samples to collect represents a clear trade-off between expense and information 
certainty. For example, the number of samples needed to demonstrate the presence of human 
fecal contamination is much lower than that required to prove its absence. Only a few positive 
results will statistically verify a human signal, while demonstrating its absence (proving the 
negative) requires a much larger sample size. Addressing a question about absence relies on a 
binomial distribution, which identifies the number of samples necessary to confidently predict 
that the percentage of samples containing human fecal material is truly less than a desired level. 
The number of samples required will be highly specific to each beach, and the mathematics 
behind demonstrating absence of a source is still an area of active research.9  
Sampling site locations largely depend on the hypotheses developed in Chapter 2. In general, the 
confluence of any creek, river, or drain flowing across the beach to the ocean should be sampled, 
along with any obvious sources or “hot spots” identified during the information-gathering stage 
                                                
9 For further guidance on the number of samples necessary to achieve statistical certainty for a variety of scenarios, 
see: Cao, Y., Hagedorn, C., Shanks, O.C., Wang, D., Ervin, J.S., Griffith, J.F., Layton, B.A., McGee, C.D., Riedel, 
T., Weisberg, S.B. Towards establishing a human fecal contamination index in microbial source tracking. Accepted 
at the International Journal of Chemical and Environmental Engineering Systems. 
<<PAGE 39>>
35  
of the study (see Chapters 2 and 3). If no “hot spots” exist, start with the most obvious physical 
sources, for example, the restroom on the beach or aged sanitary sewer collection lines. 
Sampling sites can also be chosen along a potential contamination gradient, such as several sites 
along a creek between a flowing drain and the ocean confluence. 
 
Consider at least three temporal factors in deciding when to collect water samples. First, think 
about whether high FIB corresponds to particular flow phenomena (e.g., rain events) or occurs 
year-round. Second, examine the tidal cycle. Contaminated groundwater, for example, more 
likely flows to the beach at low tide, and a spring low tide may accentuate its influence. Third, 
consider seasonality. For instance, septic tanks are less likely to flow laterally to the creek or 
beach in the dry months when the water table is low. Conversely, these exact conditions make 
leaks from sanitary collection systems more detectable. In all cases, capture the conditions 
relevant to the hypotheses under investigation, and tailor the timing of sample collection to 
maximize the odds of detecting any potential human contamination sources. 
 
If a model of FIB concentrations at the beach is to be developed to gain insight into the potential 
for different sources to contribute, temporally intensive sampling will be required and potential 
sources identified during the study will also need to be sampled. 
 
8.2 Cost Considerations 
The overall cost of a study will be dictated by the number and type of samples needed to 
adequately characterize a particular site. However, per sample costs for MST methods become 
more expensive as the technology employed becomes more complex. For example, while the per 
sample cost for a dye study is relatively low (tens of dollars), qPCR analysis for MST markers 
may cost $100 - $300/sample, depending on the number of samples and whether the analysis is 
conducted in-house or run by a consultant. Further, per sample costs for the more complex MCA 
methods range from hundreds to thousands of dollars per sample, depending on the method 
chosen and the complexity of the data analysis required. 
 
Despite the relatively high cost of performing molecular analyses for MST, there are 
opportunities for cost savings. For example, when collecting samples for FIB analysis, 
practitioners often create frozen filters that are archived for later analysis. The added 
incremental cost is small compared to collecting new water samples and the FIB data may often 
be useful in guiding which of these samples to analyze using molecular techniques. 
Similarly, purified DNA may be stored and analyzed for additional source-associated markers 
without incurring additional sample collection and DNA purification costs, thereby drastically 
lowering the per marker cost of analysis. 
 
8.3 Human Marker Considerations 
 
The number of human markers to apply depends on the level of certainty required to confirm or 
refute the presence of a human source. In most cases, HF183 Taqman suffices, and sampling at 
more places and times has greater value than reconfirming certainty about human fecal presence 
using a different marker within a single place and time. However, if one goal of the MST effort 
is to provide information for development of a site-specific water quality objective, then multiple 
markers may add an additional layer of certainty regarding the absence of a meaningful human 
fecal source. Regardless of the number of markers used, always archive DNA extracted from the 
<<PAGE 40>>
36  
original filter; likewise, create and freeze additional filters for potential later analysis. Replicate 
sample filters cost relatively little to create and can be archived at -80ºC for an extended period. 
Thus, investigators can perform additional analyses later in an adaptive fashion, for instance to 
obtain more information about conditions at a particular place and time, or if cross-reactivity 
concerns arise at a later stage in the source identification process. 
 
8.4 Nonhuman Marker Considerations 
Due to confounding factors such as the dilution and degradation rates of fecal bacteria targeted 
by these methods, detection frequency takes precedence over the magnitude of signal detection. 
As previously noted for human markers, relatively few positive samples can demonstrate the 
presence of a particular source, while many negative results are required to demonstrate its 
absence. Therefore, practitioners should opt to run only a few different markers that target the 
suspected sources on many samples, rather than running many different markers on just a few 
samples. 
 
When several different non-human sources exist in the watershed, prioritize their investigation 
according to the health risk associated with each host. For example, cattle feces are regarded as 
the most pathogenic to humans, second only to human waste. Thus, if cows are present in the 
watershed, deploy cow qPCR markers ahead of any other non-human markers. Bird waste (gull, 
chicken) is considered less pathogenic than the feces of mammals, although the volume of waste 
produced by a large flock may be sufficient to pose a health risk. 
 
While several good MST markers exist for the major non-human sources, these methods have 
some limitations. For example, not all fecal hosts (e.g. chicken, marine mammals) have 
corresponding validated markers or will have markers developed in the near future. In addition, 
practitioners may not be able to discern the dominant source. For example, 100% of samples 
may contain both gull and dog markers. The relative magnitudes of the qPCR signal cannot be 
used to determine which source is dominant, because qPCR signal magnitudes are unreliable 
(due to dilution, degradation, and differential concentrations of markers between species). 
Microbial Community Analysis (MCA), as described in Chapter 7, can potentially solve each of 
these problems: it may be able to differentiate among all possible fecal hosts and provide 
information about the dominant fecal contamination sources in the watershed. However, this 
technique has not been widely field-tested. 
 
8.5 MCA Considerations 
As with single marker methods, determining where and when to collect samples rivals the 
importance of method selection in reaching a proper source attribution conclusion. Many design 
considerations for MCA mirror those described for single-source markers, such as having 
appropriate temporal and spatial allocation relative to the potential sources. However, depending 
on the implementation approach, additional study design considerations will relate to creating the 
reference database (source samples). 
 
When implemented in a library-dependent fashion, practitioners need to consider both the 
number of sources and number of replicates for each source type to include in the reference 
database. It will be tempting to collect a small number of reference sources to limit the logistical 
challenges and cost; nevertheless, make a concerted effort to gather samples from all potential 
<<PAGE 41>>
37 
candidates. Too few reference fecal sources may fail to capture the range present in the 
watershed and result in false conclusions.  
Also consider how many different samples of a particular source type to gather. For example, 
substantial differences in genetic signatures may exist in cattle from different farms based on the 
different breeds of cow, type of feed, and antibiotic regimen. At one level, these differences offer 
a tremendous advantage in pinpointing the source to a particular farm operation. However, it can 
also pose a difficulty if intraspecies variation confounds interspecies source comparisons. In 
general, collecting samples from several distinct populations of each host animal in the 
watershed and a number of individuals within each population will allow adequate quantification 
of intraspecies variation.  
Finally, the data analysis approach greatly affects MCA’s MST performance. Unlike single 
marker methods, where analysis may be simply contracted out after sample collection, MCA 
requires collaboration with a research lab having relevant expertise starting with the study design 
phase. Four laboratories that conducted MCA in the SIPP evaluation study may be good sources 
of technical advice, including the Holden lab at the University of California Santa Barbara, the 
Andersen lab at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratories, Southern California Coastal Water 
Research Project, and the Sadowsky lab at the University of Minnesota.  
 
  
<<PAGE 42>>
38 
CHAPTER 9: SOURCE IDENTIFICATION LIMITATIONS AND ANTICIPATED 
ADVANCEMENTS IN THE FIELD 
This manual provides guidance on best practices for source identification, but some important 
method limitations remain. This chapter discusses these limitations and the best approaches for 
minimizing their effects. It also describes scientific investigations currently underway to increase 
method robustness in the future. 
9.1 False Negatives  
False negative results (failure to detect a target present in a sample) limit current source tracking 
technologies the most, since “absence of detection” does not equate to “detection of absence.” 
Sometimes practitioners reach a false negative conclusion because they collect an inadequate 
number of samples; it takes only a few samples to prove presence of a source, but many more to 
prove absence. Dilution of source water (e.g., storm drain discharge or ground water) in the surf 
zone creates concern about detection limits for samples collected at the beach rather than in the 
watershed.  
Beyond those basic sampling design concerns, several method limitations could also lead to a 
false negative. The most important is qPCR inhibition. Sometimes referred to as interference, 
inhibition occurs when substances in a sample slow down or block the PCR reaction by 
interfering with enzymes and/or DNA. Inhibition causes a delayed response in the qPCR 
reaction, resulting in underestimation of the target DNA or (in some cases) no measurable result. 
Many common elements and compounds in ambient waters can cause inhibition, such as large 
organic acids, carbohydrates, and metal cations.  
Scientists have developed a number of strategies to address PCR inhibition, several of which, 
such as DNA purification and use of more robust chemistries, have been incorporated into the 
SOPs of the recommended methods. In addition, the SOPs (Appendix A) incorporate internal 
controls to directly assess inhibition in each PCR reaction. When these internal controls indicate 
an unacceptably high level of inhibition, the most common strategy is to dilute the sample and 
lower the concentration of inhibitory compounds. While simple and inexpensive, diluting the 
sample DNA raises detection limits and runs the risk of diluting the signal too much. Scientists 
are presently working on a new PCR-based technology known as digital PCR, which may 
virtually eliminate false negatives stemming from inhibition without a concomitant loss in 
method sensitivity. Such an advance is several years away from routine application.  
Another factor, known as target degradation, decay, or aging, may lead to a negative result. 
Several environmental mechanisms reduce the number of targeted microbes in the water column 
with distance from the fecal source. These degradation mechanisms include inactivation by 
sunlight, predation by other organisms, and adsorption to particles and subsequent 
sedimentation/settling out of the water column. Scientists are beginning to better understand the 
mechanisms and relative decay rates among indicators. At present, the best strategy to avoid 
missing a signal due to degradation is to sample as close to the putative source(s) as possible. 
 
<<PAGE 43>>
39 
9.2 False Positives 
In rare circumstances, qPCR assays can produce false positive results, but this concern pales 
relative to the problem of false negatives because it rarely leads to severe economic 
consequences (e.g., from remediating a falsely diagnosed source). False positives stem from 
cross-reactivity, when a positive result for a host-associated microbe comes from a non-target 
host (e.g., human-associated bacteria found in gull feces). Two types of cross-reactivity occur in 
human markers. First, the marker may have shortcomings in its specificity. Chapters 5 and 6 
generally document these types of cross-reactions, and recommend use of a second confirmatory 
marker when one or more of the potential cross-reaction sources are present in the watershed.  
The second type of cross-reaction occurs when animals, such as domestic pets, live in close 
association with humans. In some instances, gulls thought to be feeding at landfills containing 
biosolids from wastewater treatment plants have tested positive for human markers. If you 
suspect this kind of site-specific cross-reactivity, collect and test for the presence of host-
associated markers in fecal samples from animals in the watershed. 
9.3 Source Apportionment 
Ideally, an MST study would produce a pie chart indicating relative FIB contributions from 
various host sources, rather than just documenting presence/absence; however, the technology 
for this type of source allocation does not exist at present. A poor understanding of marker 
degradation rates creates the greatest difficulty, since sources contributed from different 
locations in the watershed degrade at different unknown rates before arriving at the sampling 
site. Scientists are beginning to work on this issue. In the meantime, the best approach is to 
sample as close as possible to the potential sources based on the hypotheses generated in Step 1 
(Chapter 2), rather than relying on multiple markers collected near the base of the watershed. 
Even without degradation concerns, scientists are only now beginning to develop mathematical 
algorithms for how to combine information derived from individual source-specific markers into 
an integrated assessment. The most promising approach, called the “ratio method,” uses 
information on the ratio of host specific fecal markers and general fecal indicator bacteria in 
fecal source materials and ambient water samples to deduce the fraction of FIB in an ambient 
water sample from a specific source. Although the method has worked well for artificial samples 
created in a laboratory, this method may or may not work on complex field samples. Ongoing 
research is testing field applications of the ratio method and the effect of aging on its results.  
9.4 Source Resolution 
While MST methods have advanced significantly in the last decade, researchers continue to 
improve existing methods and develop promising new technologies and new markers. Sensitive 
and specific host-associated markers exist for many of the most frequently encountered potential 
sources, but do not cover all common animals in coastal watersheds (e.g., deer, marine 
mammals). The technology exists, making marker identification mostly a matter of time. 
Increasing the resolution of source specificity represents a bigger advance likely to take place in 
the next several years. For instance, current human markers do not differentiate between stools 
from individuals, sewage, or septic sources. Similarly, existing “gull” markers cannot 
<<PAGE 44>>
40 
differentiate between gulls, pigeons, or other seabirds. Microbial community analysis provides 
higher resolution than qPCR markers, but practitioners could benefit from an even greater level 
of resolution, such as the ability to differentiate among farms within a watershed.  
As scientists continue to test new approaches for MST with many promising results, the potential 
for better source differentiation, lower costs, and quicker time frames will continue to improve.  
  
<<PAGE 45>>
41 
FURTHER READING 
The following key publications informed the guidance provided in this manual; this section does 
not constitute a full literature review. 
Traditional Methods 
Best Management Practices for Sanitary Sewer Overflow (SSO) Reduction Strategies. Central 
Valley Clean Water Association and Bay Area Clean Water Agencies. 2009. 
http://bacwa.org/Portals/0/Committees/CollectionSystems/Library/SSO%20BMP%20Manual
%201%201.pdf 
Existing Sewer Evaluation and Rehabilitation: WEF Manual of Practice No. FD-6 ASCE/EWRI 
Manuals and Reports on Engineering Practice No. 62, Third Edition, WEF Press: Alexandria, 
Virginia 2009. 
MST Method Evaluation in California 
Boehm, A.B., Van De Werfhorst, L.C., Griffith, J.F., Holden, P.A., Jay, J.A., Shanks, O.C., 
Wang, D., Weisberg, S.B., 2013. Performance of forty-one microbial source tracking 
methods: A twenty-seven lab evaluation study. Water Research 47: 6812–6828. 
Cao, Y., Van De Werfhorst, L.C., Dubinsky, E.A., Badgley, B.D., Sadowsky, M.J., Andersen, 
G.L., Griffith, J.F., Holden, P.A., 2013. Evaluation of molecular community analysis 
methods for discerning fecal sources and human waste. Water Research 47: 6862–6872. 
Cao, Y., Van De Werfhorst, L.C., Scott, E.A., Raith, M.R., Holden, P.A., Griffith, J.F., 2013. 
Bacteroidales terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism (TRFLP) for fecal source 
differentiation in comparison to and in combination with universal bacteria TRFLP. Water 
Research 47: 6944–6955. 
Ebentier, D.L., Hanley, K.T., Cao, Y., Badgley, B.D., Boehm, A.B., Ervin, J.S., Goodwin, K.D., 
Gourmelon, M., Griffith, J.F., Holden, P.A., Kelty, C.A., Lozach, S., McGee, C., Peed, L.A., 
Raith, M., Ryu, H., Sadowsky, M.J., Scott, E.A., Domingo, J.S., Schriewer, A., Sinigalliano, 
C.D., Shanks, O.C., Van De Werfhorst, L.C., Wang, D., Wuertz, S., Jay, J.A., 2013. 
Evaluation of the repeatability and reproducibility of a suite of qPCR-based microbial source 
tracking methods. Water Research 47: 6839–6848. 
Ervin, J.S., Russell, T.L., Layton, B.A., Yamahara, K.M., Wang, D., Sassoubre, L.M., Cao, Y., 
Kelty, C.A., Sivaganesan, M., Boehm, A.B., Holden, P.A., Weisberg, S.B., Shanks, O.C., 
2013. Characterization of fecal concentrations in human and other animal sources by 
physical, culture-based, and quantitative real-time PCR methods. Water Research 47: 6873–
6882. 
Harwood, V.J., Boehm, A.B., Sassoubre, L.M., Vijayavel, K., Stewart, J.R., Fong, T.-T., 
Caprais, M.P., Converse, R.R., Diston, D., Ebdon, J., Fuhrman, J.A., Gourmelon, M., 
Gentry-Shields, J., Griffith, J.F., Kashian, D.R., Noble, R.T., Taylor, H., Wicki, M., 2013. 
Performance of viruses and bacteriophages for fecal source determination in a multi-
<<PAGE 46>>
42 
laboratory, comparative study. Water Research 47: 6929–6943. 
Layton, B.A., Cao, Y., Ebentier, D.L., Hanley, K., Ballesté, E., Brandão, J., Byappanahalli, M., 
Converse, R., Farnleitner, A.H., Gentry-Shields, J., Gidley, M.L., Gourmelon, M., Lee, C.S., 
Lee, J., Lozach, S., Madi, T., Meijer, W.G., Noble, R., Peed, L., Reischer, G.H., Rodrigues, 
R., Rose, J.B., Schriewer, A., Sinigalliano, C., Srinivasan, S., Stewart, J., Van De Werfhorst, 
L.C., Wang, D., Whitman, R.L., Wuertz, S., Jay, J., Holden, P.A., Boehm, A.B., Shanks, 
O.C., Griffith, J.F., 2013. Performance of human fecal anaerobe-associated PCR-based 
assays in a multi-laboratory method evaluation study. Water Research 47: 6897–6908. 
Raith, M.R., Kelty, C.A., Griffith, J.F., Schriewer, A., Wuertz, S., Mieszkin, S., Gourmelon, M., 
Reischer, G.H., Farnleitner, A.H., Ervin, J.S., Holden, P.A., Ebentier, D.L., Jay, J.A., Wang, 
D., Boehm, A.B., Aw, T.G., Rose, J.B., Ballesté, E., Meijer, W.G., Sivaganesan, M., Shanks, 
O.C., 2013. Comparison of PCR and quantitative real-time PCR methods for the 
characterization of ruminant and cattle fecal pollution sources. Water Research 47: 6921–
6928. 
Schriewer, A., Goodwin, K.D., Sinigalliano, C.D., Cox, A.M., Wanless, D., Bartkowiak, J., 
Ebentier, D.L., Hanley, K.T., Ervin, J., Deering, L.A., Shanks, O.C., Peed, L.A., Meijer, 
W.G., Griffith, J.F., SantoDomingo, J., Jay, J.A., Holden, P.A., Wuertz, S., 2013. 
Performance evaluation of canine-associated Bacteroidales assays in a multi-laboratory 
comparison study. Water Research 47: 6909–6920. 
Sinigalliano, C.D., Ervin, J.S., Van De Werfhorst, L.C., Badgley, B.D., Ballesté, E., Bartkowiak, 
J., Boehm, A.B., Byappanahalli, M., Goodwin, K.D., Gourmelon, M., Griffith, J.F., Holden, 
P.A., Jay, J., Layton, B.A., Lee, C., Lee, J., Meijer, W.G., Noble, R., Raith, M., Ryu, H., 
Sadowsky, M.J., Schriewer, A., Wang, D., Wanless, D., Whitman, R.L., Wuertz, S., Santo 
Domingo, J.W., 2013. Multi-laboratory evaluations of the performance of Catellicoccus 
marimammalium PCR assays developed to target gull fecal sources. Water Research 47: 
6883–6896. 
Stewart, J.R., Boehm, A.B., Dubinsky, E.A., Fong, T.-T., Goodwin, K.D., Griffith, J.F., Noble, 
R.T., Shanks, O.C., Vijayavel, K., Weisberg, S.B., 2013. Recommendations following a 
multi-laboratory comparison of microbial source tracking methods. Water Research 47: 
6829–6838. 
Wang, D., Farnleitner, A.H., Field, K.G., Green, H.C., Shanks, O.C., Boehm, A.B., 2013. 
Enterococcus and Escherichia coli fecal source apportionment with microbial source 
tracking genetic markers – Is it feasible? Water Research 47: 6849–6861. 
Field Case Studies 
Boehm, A.B., Fuhrman, J.A., Mrše, R.D., Grant, S.B., 2003. Tiered Approach for Identification 
of a Human Fecal Pollution Source at a Recreational Beach:  Case Study at Avalon Bay, 
Catalina Island, California. Environmental Science and Technology 37: 673–680. 
<<PAGE 47>>
43 
Cao Y., Van De Werfhorst, L.C., Sercu, B., Murray, J.L.S., Holden, P.A., 2011. Application of 
an integrated community analysis approach for microbial source tracking in a coastal creek. 
Environmental Science & Technology 45: 7195-7201. 
Dubinsky, E.A., Esmaili, L., Hulls, J.R., Cao, Y., Griffith, J.F., Andersen, G.L, 2012. 
Application of phylogenetic microarray analysis to discriminate sources of fecal pollution. 
Environmental Science & Technology 46: 4340-4347. 
Ervin, J.S.,Van de Werfhorst, L.C, Holden, P.A. Microbial Source Tracking in a Coastal 
Suburban Watershed Reveals Domestic Dogs as a Significant yet Controllable Source of 
Fecal Contamination. In preparation. 
Layton, B.A., Raith, M., Griffith, J.G. Use of dye tracers and qPCR to identify sources of human 
fecal contamination at an urban marine beach. In preparation. 
Noble, R.T., Griffith, J.F., Blackwood, A.D., Fuhrman, J.A., Gregory, J.B., Hernandez, X., 
Liang, X., Bera, A.A., Schiff, K., 2006. Multitiered Approach Using Quantitative PCR To 
Track Sources of Fecal Pollution Affecting Santa Monica Bay, California. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology 72: 1604–1612. 
Riedel, T., Jay, J.A. Microbial Source Tracking Case Study at Topanga State Beach. In 
preparation. 
Russell, T.L., Sassoubre, L.M., Wang, D., Masuda, S., Chen, H., Soetjipto, C., Hassaballah, A., 
Boehm, A.B., 2013. A Coupled Modeling and Molecular Biology Approach to Microbial 
Source Tracking at Cowell Beach, Santa Cruz, CA, United States. Environmental Science & 
Technology 47: 10231–10239. 
Santoro, A.E., Boehm, A.B., 2007. Frequent occurrence of the human-specific Bacteroides fecal 
marker at an open coast marine beach: Relationship to waves, tides and traditional indicators. 
Environmental Microbiology 9: 2038–2049. 
Sercu, B., Van De Werfhorst, L.C., Murray, J.L.S., Holden, P.A., 2011. Sewage Exfiltration As a 
Source of Storm Drain Contamination during Dry Weather in Urban Watersheds. 
Environmental Science and Technology 45: 7151–7157. 
 
  
<<PAGE 48>>
44 
APPENDIX A: STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES (SOPS) FOR RECOMMENDED 
MST MARKER METHODS 
Appendix A1. Membrane filtration for molecular analysis ................................ ...................46 
Equipment and Supplies ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 46 
Filtration Method ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  46 
Appendix A2: DNA EZ ST1 Extraction SOP (GeneRite, LLC) ................................ ...............48 
Equipment and Supplies ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 48 
Extraction for Filters ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  48 
Appendix A3: Sketa (Sample Processing Control) qPCR SOP ................................ ............50 
Primer/Probe Mix Preparation ................................ ................................ ...............................  51 
Master Mix Preparation ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 51 
Appendix A4: HF183 Taqman qPCR SOP ................................ ................................ ..............52 
Equipment and Supplies ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 52 
Primer/Probe Mix Preparation ................................ ................................ ...............................  53 
Master Mix Preparation ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 54 
Appendix A5: HumM2 qPCR SOP ................................ ................................ ..........................55 
Equipment and Supplies ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 55 
Primer/Probe Mix Preparation ................................ ................................ ...............................  56 
Master Mix Preparation ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 57 
Appendix A6: BacCan-UCD qPCR SOP ................................ ................................ .................58 
Equipment and Supplies ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 58 
Master Mix Preparation ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 59 
Appendix A7: DogBact qPCR SOP ................................ ................................ ........................61 
Equipment and Supplies ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 61 
Master Mix Preparation ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 62 
Appendix A8: CowM2 qPCR SOP ................................ ................................ ..........................64 
Equipment and Supplies ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 64 
Primer/Probe Mix Preparation ................................ ................................ ...............................  66 
Master Mix Preparation ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 67 
Appendix A9: Rum2Bac qPCR SOP................................ ................................ .......................68 
Equipment and Supplies ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 68 
Primer/Probe Mix Preparation ................................ ................................ ...............................  69 
Master Mix Preparation ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 70 
Appendix A10: Pig2Bac qPCR SOP ................................ ................................ .......................71 
Equipment and Supplies ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 71 
Master Mix Preparation ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 74 
<<PAGE 49>>
45 
Appendix A11: Horse Conventional PCR SOP ................................ ................................ ......75 
Equipment and Supplies ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 75 
Master Mix Preparation ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 76 
Appendix A12: Gull2 Taqman qPCR SOP ................................ ................................ .............78 
Equipment and Supplies ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 78 
Master Mix Preparation ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 79 
Appendix A13: Lee Seagull qPCR SOP ................................ ................................ .................81 
Equipment and Supplies ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 81 
Master Mix Preparation ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 82 
 
  
<<PAGE 50>>
46 
Appendix A1. Membrane filtration for molecular analysis 
Equipment and Supplies 
Polycarbonate membrane, 47mm, 0.45µm 
Manifold setup for filtration (adaptor, vacuum pump and flask etc.) 
Filtration funnel (the following protocol uses disposable funnels) 
Pre-labeled 2 ml microtube (i.e., bead beating tubes w/ or w/o preloaded beads)  
Freezer boxes  
Filter forceps 
95% ethanol 
Beaker 
Alcohol lamp or Bunsen burner 
Sterile PBS rinsing buffer (pH 7.4, sodium dihydrogen phosphate at 4.085 mM, sodium 
monhydrogen Phosphate at 20.83 mM, sodium chloride at 145.4 mM in 1L of molecular 
grade dI water) 
Liquid nitrogen and dewar for flash freezing filter tubes (place in dewar before starting 
filtrations) 
Bench recording sheet (operator name, sample name, etc.) and pen 
Safety items: gloves, lab coat, safety glasses 
 
 
Filtration Method 
NOTE: Sterilize the bench area thoroughly with 70% ethanol or 10% bleach solution before and 
after filtration procedure  
 
1. Connect manifold, vacuum tubing, vacuum flasks. 
2. Insert adaptor (supplied with funnels) into rubber stopper so it is ready to mount filtration 
funnels. 
3. One should test whether the vacuum assembly is working properly before moving 
forward. Turn on the pump and close all valves. Then adjust the vacuum pressure using 
the knurled knob on the vacuum inlet of the pump. (<20 inch Hg, or <0.6 atm). 
4. Light the alcohol lamp or Bunsen burner (for flame sterilization). 
5. Wear gloves and use aseptic techniques from now on. 
6. Place corresponding 2ml microtubes in rack, unscrew cap to loose only (ready for storing 
membrane filter after completion of filtration). 
7. Soak one pair of forceps in a beaker with 95% ethanol. 
8. Mount the filtration funnel (i.e. housing) on to the adaptor; label the funnel with sample 
name.  
9. Remove the funnel from the base and place it upside down on the bench on top of its lid.   
10. Take one pair of forceps, flame sterilize, allow to cool a little, then pick up the grid filter 
from the filtration housing, discard the grid filter (be careful not to damage the supporting 
filter underneath the grid filter). 
11. Use the same forceps to carefully pick up one polycarbonate membrane (clear grayish 
membrane in-between paper separators, do not mistake the paper separator as the 
<<PAGE 51>>
47 
membrane filter), and carefully place it onto the center of the supporting filter (to replace 
the grid filter discarded in step 10). 
12. Put the forceps back into the beaker with ethanol. 
13. Mount the filtration funnel (that was set aside in step 9) back onto the housing to secure 
the polycarbonate membrane (make sure there is no gap between the edge of 
polycarbonate membrane and the bottom of the filtration funnel and that the edge of the 
membrane is not folded, i.e. no liquid should go through the housing/support without 
passing through the polycarbonate membrane first). 
14. Take sample bottle off ice, shake and fill the funnel with 100ml water sample (depending 
on turbidity of the water, one may need to start with a smaller volume), open the vacuum 
valve and start filtering. Check off on the recording list, or record volume filtered (if filter 
clogs before designated volume is reached) each time. Rinse the sides of the funnel with 
10-20mL PBS once sample volume has gone through.  
15. After all liquid passes through the membrane filter, close vacuum valve and remove the 
funnel. 
16. Using a pair of flame sterilized (and cooled) forceps, carefully roll up the polycarbonate 
membrane filter on the housing. First, fold the membrane in half and hold in place with 
second forceps. Then, using each pair of forceps alternately, roll the membrane 
approximately 2 times. Place into the corresponding 2ml microtube (check the label on 
the tube), screw the cap securely. 
17. Flash freeze the filter tube with liquid nitrogen. Keep in liquid nitrogen until samples are 
ready for transfer to -80º C freezer (organize the tubes in the freezer box first) and/or 
extraction. 
 
<<PAGE 52>>
48 
Appendix A2: DNA EZ ST1 Extraction SOP (GeneRite, LLC) 
Equipment and Supplies 
Extraction Kit 
1.7mL low bind microtubes  
10, 100, 1000µL pipets and barrier tips  
Kimwipes 
DNA Away 
Microfuge 
Minspin 
Vortex 
Beadbeater 
Microtube rack 
 
 
Extraction for Filters 
NOTE: Lysis buffer can include 10ng/µL salmon DNA stock as a sample processing control 
(SPC). The salmon DNA is used to determine recovery during extraction. In order to process 
samples with SPC, add 10µL of salmon stock into 490µL lysis buffer per sample (i.e. if 
extracting 10 samples, mix 100µL salmon stock and 4900µL lysis buffer together and distribute 
to each sample tube). Run the Sketa qPCR assay on the samples to measure recovery. 
 
1. Add 500µL (SPC) lysis buffer to each filter tube (i.e. a filter placed into a tube preloaded 
with beads during filtration process). Do not transfer a frozen filter from one tube to 
another. 
2. Tighten caps and bead beat samples at maximum setting on Bead Beater (biospec) for 
2minutes. 
3. Centrifuge tubes at 12,000 rcf for 1min. 
4. Pipette maximum volume of supernatant out of the bead beating tube, and add to a new 
1.5ml microfuge tube. Throughout this extraction do not put tubes next to each other and 
only have one tube open at a time to minimize the chance of contamination. 
5. Centrifuge at 12000 rcf for 1min 
6. Pipette out 300µL supernatant (take care not to disturb the pellet) and add it to 1000µL 
binding buffer in a new, labeled 1.5mL microtube. Pipette up and down to mix and gently 
vortex.  
7. Add 690µL of the DNA/binding buffer mixture (from step 6) to spin column and 
centrifuge for 1 minute at 10,000 rcf (discard flow through). Place the spin column in 
new collection tube. Repeat step 7 once. 
8. Add 500µL EZ wash buffer and centrifuge for 1 minute at 10,000rcf (discard flow 
through). Place spin column in new collection tube. Repeat step 8 once. 
9. After the second wash, place spin column in another new collection tube and centrifuge 
at 10,000 rcf for 1min (to get rid of any residual ethanol in the wash buffer). 
10. Put column into final 1.7mL low bind microtube. Add 50µL elution buffer, let sit for 1 
minute, centrifuge for 1 minute at 10,000 rcf (keep flow through). Repeat step 10 once. 
<<PAGE 53>>
49 
11. Vortex the final 100µL elution buffer/DNA solution and aliquot 50µL or less to other lo-
bind microtubes to save for later analysis. The number of aliquots will depend on how 
many assays will be run with the extract. 
12. Run qPCR and/or store extracted DNA in -20°C (non-autodefrost) or -80ºC freezer. 
 
 
<<PAGE 54>>
50 
Appendix A3: Sketa (Sample Processing Control) qPCR SOP  
Equipment and Supplies 
1.7mL low bind microtubes  
10, 100, 1000µL pipets and barrier tips  
Kimwipes 
DNA Away  
10% Bleach 
Minspin 
Vortex  
Microtube rack 
Laminar flow hoods (one for ‘reagents only’ and one for ‘DNA only’)  
Thermal Cycler 
TaqMan Environmental PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Catalogue # 4396838) 
2 mg/mL Bovine serum albumen (BSA), fraction V 
Forward primer-(SketaF): 5'- GGTTTCCGCAGCTGGG -3’ prepared in 500µM stock 
Reverse primer-(SketaR): 5'- CCGAGCCGTCCTGGTC-3’ prepared in 500µM stock 
Probe-(SketaP): [6-FAM]-5'- AGTCGCAGGCGGCCACCGT –TAMRA prepared in 100µM 
stock 
AE buffer (Qiagen #19077) 
Ultrapure water (Specialty Media, Phillipsburg, NJ #TMS-006-A) 
Salmon DNA (Sigma, D1626) 
 
1. Prepare salmon stocks in a separate area from sample processing and qPCR areas.  
2. Create a 10mg/mL stock of the salmon solution by adding salmon DNA to AE buffer and 
vortexing until solution is homogenous (~4hrs). Note that this DNA material is fibrous 
and it can take a while to fully dissolve.   
3. Quantify the stock solution just created and prepare a 10ug/mL salmon solution by 
mixing 25µL of 10mg/mL stock into 24.975 mL of AE buffer (just an example 
concentration). Make 1mL aliquots of this solution for storage at -20°C (need to make 
new stock every year) or 4°C (need to make new stock every 6 months).  
 
Prepare standard curves from the plasmid stock solution prepared above. The curve should range 
from 1.00x101 copies/2µL - 1.00x10-3 copies/2µL. This range encompasses the concentration of 
salmon DNA added to extractions IF used for samples. Create the standard curve using a 1:10 
dilution series. Run the sketa assay parallel with another target (i.e. HF183, HumM2) to assess 
extraction recovery. In addition to a standard curve, run negative extraction controls (NEC) and 
No template controls (NTC) on each plate. 
 
NOTE: Use a dedicated Laminar flow hood containing all needed equipment when preparing 
master mixes for qPCR. Wipe surfaces with 10% bleach solution and let sit for 10 minutes 
before wiping away. Additionally, apply UV light to all hoods before and after use for at least 30 
minutes. If possible prepare DNA template in a hood separate from where reagents are prepared 
to avoid contamination. Always use disposable gloves and wear a lab coat.  
 
 
<<PAGE 55>>
51 
Primer/Probe Mix Preparation 
Create batches of primer probe mix in the reagent hood using dedicated pipets with barrier pipet 
tips only. Reconstitute dried primers with AE buffer as recommended by the manufacturer to 
create 500 µM stocks. If probes are dry, reconstitute them in TE (pH 8.0) at 100 µM stocks and 
create many small aliquots for one time use.     
 
Table 1: Sketa primer/probe mix for simplex applications 
Reagent Stock Solution Primer/Probe Mix 
Forward Primer 500 µM 10 µL 
Reverse Primer 500 µM 10 µL 
Probe 100 µM 4 µL 
PCR clean water — 576 µL 
 
Master Mix Preparation  
Prepare reagents in dedicated ‘Reagent only’ Laminar flow hood using dedicated laboratory 
equipment and supplies. 
 
1. Prepare respective MasterMix preparation as described below: 
 
Reagent Stock Solution 25 µL Reaction Master Mix (100 rxns) 
Environmental Master Mix 2X 12.5 µL 1250 µL 
BSA 2mg/mL 2.5 µL 250 µL 
Primer/Probe Mix 1 µM/80 nM 3.0 µL 300 µL 
PCR clean water — 4.0 µL 400 µL 
 
2. Transfer 23 µL of master mix into each 96-well plate. 
3. Cover tray with aluminum adhesive tape, label, and store in dark on ice for transport to 
‘DNA only’ hood for template inoculation.  
4. Vortex and spin down all DNA templates before inoculation. Add 2µL of template to 
each well.   
5. Cover the inoculated plate with PCR sealing film and load in the thermal cycler.  
6. Launch the thermal cycling software and create a plate setup. Clearly label cach sample 
and the controls.   
7. The thermal cycling protocol is as follows:  
 
Cycle Number Temperature (°C) Time 
1 50 2 min 
1 95 10 min 
40 95 15 sec 
40 60 1 min 
  
8. After the protocol is successfully loaded, start the run 
9. After the run, apply the correct baseline to the data (may vary from platform to platform, 
i.e. 0.08 on ABI, 100 on CFX). Data can then be exported for analysis.   
  
<<PAGE 56>>
52 
 
Appendix A4: HF183 Taqman qPCR SOP  
Equipment and Supplies 
1.7mL low bind microtubes  
10, 100, 1000µL pipets and barrier tips  
Kimwipes 
DNA Away  
10% Bleach 
Minspin 
Vortex  
Microtube rack 
Laminar flow hoods (one for ‘reagents only’ and one for ‘DNA only’)  
Thermal Cycler 
TaqMan Environmental PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Catalogue # 4396838) 
2 mg/mL Bovine serum albumen (BSA), fraction V 
Forward primer-(HF-183): 5'- ATCATGAGTTCACATGTCCG -3’ 
Reverse primer-(BacR287): 5'- CTTCCTCTCAGAACCCCTATCC -3’ 
TaqMan® probe -(BacP234MGB): [6-FAM]-5'- CTAATGGAACGCATCCC –MGB 
TaqMan® probe -(Bac234IAC): [VIC]-5'- AACACGCCGTTGCTACA –MGB 
AE buffer (Qiagen #19077) 
Ultrapure water (Specialty Media, Phillipsburg, NJ #TMS-006-A) 
Plasmid containing target (at known copy number):  
HF183Reference (i.e. sequence that can be inserted into a plasmid vector) 
5’-cgtcaggtttgtttcggtattgagtatcgaaaatctcacggattaactcttgtgtacgctCTCGAGgaccagctaatg 
Catataaataagttacgtgatgagaccggcgcacgggtgagtaacacgtatccaacctgccgtctactcttggccagccttctgaaag
gaagattaatccaggatgggatcatgagttcacatgtccgcatgattaaaggtattttccggtagacgatggggatgcgttccatta
gCTCGAGatagtaggcggggtaacggcccacctagtcaacgatggataggggttctgagaggaagg-3’ 
 
IAC Reference (i.e. sequence that can be inserted into a plasmid vector): 
5’-atcgcgtcaggtttgtttcggtattgagCCTGCCGTCTCGTGCTCCTCAtctcgaggaccagctaatg 
catataaataagttacgtgatgaatgcgaccggcgcacgggtgagtaacacgtatccaacctgccgtctactcttggccagccttctga
aaggaagattaatccaggatgggatcatgagttcacatgtccgcatgattaaaggtattttccggtagacgatgTGTAGCA
ACGGCGTGTTatagtaggcggggtaacggcccacctagtcaacgatggataggggttctgagaggaagg-3’ 
 
1. Prepare standards in a separate area from sample processing and qPCR areas.  
2. In the tube from IDT add 100µL DNase RNase free dI water. Let sit for ~40min. Use 
50µL for restriction enzyme digestion, and save the other 50µL for digestion later (you 
can digest the full 100µL in one batch if needed).  
3. Digest with Not1 following manufacturer’s instructions (or equivalent restriction enzyme, 
i.e. PVU1) 
4. Clean the digested product with the QIAGEN Plasmid Mini Kit following manufacturer’s 
instructions.  
5. Measure the final product’s A260 absorbance reading in triplicate. Use the absorbance 
reading from above to calculate the plasmid concentration in ng/µL. 
6. Calculate copy/µL using the plasmid size (provided by IDT) and the ng/µL concentration 
from above: 
<<PAGE 57>>
53 
 
6.023 x 1023 molecules/gram   =  Y plasmid molecule molecules/gram 
(X bp)(650 Daltons/bp) 
 
X=total # of bps in plasmid 
 
Use the absorbance to calculate the concentration of the plasmid in copies/2µL 
 
7. Prepare stock solution of 107copy/2µL based on the concentration above, and aliquot in 
small volumes for future use.   
 
Prepare standard curves from the plasmid stock solution prepared above. The curve should range 
from 1.00x106 copies/2µL - 1.00x101 copies/2µL. This range can be adjusted to encompass the 
most appropriate concentrations of target. Create the standard curve sing a 1:10 dilution series. 
The IAC plasmid is not used in a standard curve but in the master mix as an internal control to 
assess inhibition and should amplify at ~32 cycles. In addition to a standard curve, run negative 
extraction controls (NEC) and No template controls (NTC) on each plate. 
 
NOTE: Use a dedicated Laminar flow hood containing all needed equipment when preparing 
master mixes for qPCR. Wipe surfaces with 10% bleach solution and let sit for 10 minutes 
before wiping away. Additionally, apply UV light to all hoods before and after use for at least 30 
minutes. If possible prepare DNA template in a hood separate from where reagents are prepared 
to avoid contamination. Always use disposable gloves and wear a lab coat.  
 
 
Primer/Probe Mix Preparation 
Create batches of primer probe mix in the reagent hood using dedicated pipets with barrier pipet 
tips only. Reconstitute dried primers with AE buffer as recommended by the manufacturer to 
create 500 µM stocks. If probes are dry, reconstitute them in TE (pH 8.0) at 100 µM stocks and 
divide into many small aliquots for one time use.     
 
Table 1: HF183 Taqman primer/probe mix for simplex applications. 
 
Reagent Stock Solution Primer/Probe Mix 
Forward Primer 500 µM 10 µL 
Reverse Primer 500 µM 10 µL 
6FAM Probe 100 µM 4 µL 
VIC Probe 100 µM 4 µL 
PCR clean water — 572 µL 
 
  
<<PAGE 58>>
54 
Master Mix Preparation  
Prepare reagents in dedicated ‘Reagent only’ Laminar flow hood using dedicated laboratory 
equipment and supplies. 
 
1. Prepare respective MasterMix preparation as described below: 
 
Reagent Stock Solution 25 µL Reaction Master Mix (100 rxns) 
Environmental Master Mix 2X 12.5 µL 1250 µL 
BSA 2mg/mL 2.5 µL 250 µL 
Primer/Probe Mix 1 µM/80 nM 3.0 µL 300 µL 
PCR clean water — 4.0 µL 400 µL 
IAC plasmid — 1 µL 100 µL 
 
2. Transfer 23 µL of master mix into each 96-well plate. 
3. Cover tray with aluminum adhesive tape, label, and store in dark on ice for transport to 
‘DNA only’ hood for template inoculation.  
4. Vortexed and spin down all DNA templates before inoculation. Add 2µL of template to 
each well. 
5. Cover the inoculated plated with PCR sealing film and load onto the thermal cycler.  
6. Launch the thermal cycling software and create a plate setup. Clearly label each sample 
and the controls.   
7. The thermal cycling protocol is as follows:  
 
Cycle Number Temperature (°C) Time 
1 50 2 min 
1 95 10 min 
40 95 15 sec 
40 60 1 min 
  
8. After the protocol is successfully loaded, start the run  
9. After the run, apply the correct baseline to the data (may vary from platform to platform, 
i.e. 0.08 on ABI, 100 on CFX). Data can then be exported for analysis.   
 
 
 
<<PAGE 59>>
55 
Appendix A5: HumM2 qPCR SOP  
Equipment and Supplies 
1.7mL low bind microtubes  
10, 100, 1000µL pipets and barrier tips  
Kimwipes 
DNA Away  
10% Bleach 
Minspin 
Vortex  
Microtube rack 
Laminar flow hoods (one for ‘reagents only’ and one for ‘DNA only’)  
Thermal Cycler 
TaqMan Environmental PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Catalogue # 4396838) 
2 mg/mL Bovine serum albumen (BSA), fraction V 
Forward primer-(HumM2F): 5'- CGTCAGGTTTGTTTCGGTATTG -3’ prepared as a 500 
μM solution 
Reverse primer-(HumM2R): 5'- TCATCACGTAACTTATTTATATGCATTAGC -3’ 
prepared as a 500 μM solution 
TaqMan® probe -(HumM2P): [6-FAM]-5'- TATCGAAAATCTCACGGATTAACTCTTG 
TGTACGC–TAMRA prepared as a 100 μM solution 
TaqMan® probe -(UC1P1): [VIC]-5'- CCTGCCGTCTCGTGCTCCTCA –TAMRA 
AE buffer (Qiagen #19077) 
Ultrapure water (Specialty Media, Phillipsburg, NJ #TMS-006-A) 
Plasmid containing target (at known copy number):  
HumM2 Reference (i.e. sequence that can be inserted into a plasmid vector) 
5’-cgtcaggtttgtttcggtattgagtatcgaaaatctcacggattaactcttgtgtacgctCTCGAGgaccagctaatg 
Catataaataagttacgtgatgagaccggcgcacgggtgagtaacacgtatccaacctgccgtctactcttggccagccttctgaaag
gaagattaatccaggatgggatcatgagttcacatgtccgcatgattaaaggtattttccggtagacgatggggatgcgttccatta
gCTCGAGatagtaggcggggtaacggcccacctagtcaacgatggataggggttctgagaggaagg-3’ 
 
IAC Reference (i.e. sequence that can be inserted into a plasmid vector) 
5’-atcgcgtcaggtttgtttcggtattgagCCTGCCGTCTCGTGCTCCTCAtctcgaggaccagctaatg 
catataaataagttacgtgatgaatgcgaccggcgcacgggtgagtaacacgtatccaacctgccgtctactcttggccagccttctga
aaggaagattaatccaggatgggatcatgagttcacatgtccgcatgattaaaggtattttccggtagacgatgTGTAGCA
ACGGCGTGTTatagtaggcggggtaacggcccacctagtcaacgatggataggggttctgagaggaagg-3’ 
 
1. Prepare standards in a separate area from sample processing and qPCR areas.  
2. In the tube from IDT add 100µL DNase RNase free dI water. Let sit for ~40min. Use 
50µL for restriction enzyme digestion, and save the other 50µL for digestion later (you 
can digest the full 100µL in one batch if needed).  
3. Digest with Not1 following manufacturer’s instructions (or equivalent restriction enzyme, 
i.e. PVU1) 
4. Clean the digested product with the QIAGEN Plasmid Mini Kit following manufacturer’s 
instructions.  
5. Measure the final product’s A260 absorbance reading in triplicate. Use the absorbance 
reading from above to calculate the plasmid concentration in ng/µL. 
<<PAGE 60>>
56 
6. Calculate copy/µL using the plasmid size (provided by IDT) and the ng/µL concentration 
from above: 
 
6.023 x 1023 molecules/gram   =  Y plasmid molecule molecules/gram 
(X bp)(650 Daltons/bp) 
 
X=total # of bps in plasmid 
 
Use the absorbance to calculate the concentration of the plasmid in copies/2µL 
 
7. Prepare stock solution of 107copy/2µL based on the concentration above, and aliquot in 
small volumes for future use.   
 
Prepare standard curves from the plasmid stock solution prepared above. The curve should range 
from 1.00x106 copies/2µL - 1.00x101 copies/2µL. This range can be adjusted to encompass the 
most appropriate concentrations of target. Create the standard curve using a 1:10 dilution series. 
In addition to a standard curve, run negative extraction controls (NEC) and No template controls 
(NTC) on each plate. 
 
NOTE: Use a dedicated Laminar flow hood containing all needed equipment when preparing 
master mixes for qPCR. Wipe surfaces with 10% bleach solution and let sit for 10 minutes 
before wiping away. Additionally, apply UV light to all hoods before and after use for at least 30 
minutes. If possible prepare DNA template in a hood separate from where reagents are prepared 
to avoid contamination. Always use disposable gloves and wear a lab coat.  
 
 
Primer/Probe Mix Preparation 
Create batches of primer probe mix in the reagent hood using pipets with barrier pipet tips only. 
Reconstitute dried primers with AE buffer as recommended by the manufacturer to create 500 
µM stocks. Reconstitute probes in TE (pH 8.0) at 100 µM stocks and dispense into many small 
aliquots for one time use.    
 
Table 1: HumM2 primer/probe mix for simplex applications. 
Reagent Stock Solution Primer/Probe Mix 
Forward Primer 500 µM 10 µL 
Reverse Primer 500 µM 10 µL 
6FAM Probe 100 µM 4 µL 
VIC Probe 100 µM 4 µL 
PCR clean water — 572 µL 
 
  
<<PAGE 61>>
57 
Master Mix Preparation  
Prepare reagents in dedicated ‘Reagent only’ Laminar flow hood using dedicated laboratory 
equipment and supplies. 
 
1. Prepare respective MasterMix preparation as described below: 
Reagent Stock Solution 25 µL Reaction Master Mix (100 rxns) 
Environmental Master Mix 2X 12.5 µL 1250 µL 
BSA 2mg/mL 2.5 µL 250 µL 
Primer/Probe Mix 1 µM/80 nM 3.0 µL 300 µL 
PCR clean water — 4.0 µL 400 µL 
IAC plasmid — 1 µL 100 µL 
 
2. Transfer 23 µL of master mix into each 96-well plate. 
3. Cover tray with aluminum adhesive tape, label, and store in dark on ice for transport to 
‘DNA only’ hood for template inoculation.  
4. Vortex and spin down all DNA templates before inoculation. Add 2µL of template to 
each well.  
5. Cover the inoculated plated with PCR sealing film and load onto the thermal cycler.  
6. Launch the thermal cycling software and create a plate setup. Clearly label each sample 
and the controls.   
7. The thermal cycling protocol is as follows:  
 
Cycle Number Temperature (°C) Time 
1 50 2 min 
1 95 10 min 
40 95 15 sec 
40 60 1 min 
  
8. After the protocol has successfully loaded, start the run  
9. After the run, apply the correct baseline to the data (may vary from platform to platform, 
i.e. 0.08 on ABI, 100 on CFX). Data can then be exported for analysis.   
 
  
 
  
<<PAGE 62>>
58 
Appendix A6: BacCan-UCD qPCR SOP  
Equipment and Supplies 
1.7mL low bind microtubes  
10, 100, 1000µL pipets and barrier tips  
Kimwipes 
DNA Away  
10% Bleach 
Minspin 
Vortex  
Microtube rack 
Laminar flow hoods (one for ‘reagents only’ and one for ‘DNA only’)  
Thermal Cycler 
TaqMan Environmental PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Catalogue # 4396838) 
2 mg/mL Bovine serum albumen (BSA), fraction V 
Forward primer-(BacCan-545f1): 5'- GGAGCGCAGACGGGTTTT -3’ prepared as a 100 
μM solution 
Reverse primer-(BacUni-690r1): 5'- CAATCGGAGTTCTTCGTGATATCTA -3’ prepared 
as a 100 μM solution 
Reverse primer-(BacUni-690-r2): 5'- AATCGGAGTTCCTCGTGATATCTA -3’ prepared as 
a 100 μM solution 
Probe-(BacUni-656p): [6-FAM]-5'- TGGTGTAGCGGTGAAA -TAMRA–MGB prepared as 
a 100 μM solution 
AE buffer (Qiagen #19077) 
Ultrapure water (Specialty Media, Phillipsburg, NJ #TMS-006-A) 
Plasmid containing target (at known copy number):  
BacCan UCD Reference (i.e. sequence that can be inserted into a plasmid vector) 
5’-  
-3’ 
 
1. Prepare standards in a separate area from sample processing and qPCR areas.  
2. In the tube from IDT add 100µL DNase RNase free dI water. Let sit for ~40min. Use 
50µL for restriction enzyme digestion, and save the other 50µL for digestion later (you 
can digest the full 100µL in one batch if needed).  
3. Digest with Not1 following manufacturer’s instructions (or equivalent restriction enzyme, 
i.e. PVU1) 
4. Clean the digested product with the QIAGEN Plasmid Mini Kit following manufacturer’s 
instructions.  
5. Measure the final product’s A260 absorbance reading in triplicate. Use the absorbance 
reading from above to calculate the plasmid concentration in ng/µL. 
6. Calculate copy/µL using the plasmid size (provided by IDT) and the ng/µL concentration 
from above: 
 
6.023 x 1023 molecules/gram   =  Y plasmid molecule molecules/gram 
(X bp)(650 Daltons/bp) 
 
X=total # of bps in plasmid 
<<PAGE 63>>
59 
 
Use the absorbance to calculate the concentration of the plasmid in copies/2µL 
 
7. Prepare stock solution of 107copy/2µL based on the concentration above, and aliquot in 
small volumes for future use.   
 
Prepare standard curves from the plasmid stock solution prepared above. The curve should range 
from 1.00x106 copies/2µL - 1.00x101 copies/2µL. This range can be adjusted to encompass the 
most appropriate concentrations of target. Create the standard curve using a 1:10 dilution series . 
In addition to a standard curve, run negative extraction controls (NEC) and No template controls 
(NTC) on each plate. 
 
NOTE: Use a dedicated Laminar flow hood containing all needed equipment when preparing 
master mixes for qPCR. Wipe surfaces with 10% bleach solution and let sit for 10 minutes 
before wiping away. Additionally, apply UV light to all hoods before and after use for at least 30 
minutes. If possible prepare DNA template in a hood separate from where reagents are prepared 
to avoid contamination. Always use disposable gloves and wear a lab coat.  
 
 
Master Mix Preparation  
Reconstitute dried primers with AE buffer as recommended by the manufacturer to create 100 
µM stocks. Reconstitute probes in TE (pH 8.0) at 100 µM stocks and aliquot for one time use.     
 
Prepare reagents in dedicated ‘Reagent only’ Laminar flow hood using dedicated laboratory 
equipment and supplies. 
 
1. Prepare respective MasterMix preparation as described below: 
Reagent Stock Solution 25 µL Reaction Master Mix (100 rxns) 
Environmental Master Mix 2X 12.5 µL 1250 µL 
Forward primer 100 µM 0.1 µL 10 µL 
Reverse primer 1 100 µM 0.1 µL 10 µL 
Reverse primer 2 100 µM 0.1 µL 10 µL 
Probe 100 µM 0.02 µL 2 µL 
PCR clean water — 2.18 µL 218 µL 
DNA template — 10 µL — 
 
2. Transfer 15 μL of master mix into each 96-well plate. 
3. Cover tray with aluminum adhesive tape, label, and store in dark on ice for transport to 
‘DNA only’ hood for template inoculation.  
4. Vortex and spin down All DNA templates before inoculation. Add 10µL of template to 
each well.   
5. Cover the inoculated plate with PCR sealing film and load onto the thermal cycler.  
6. Launch the thermal cycling software and create a plate setup. Clearly label each sample 
and the controls.   
  
<<PAGE 64>>
60 
7. The thermal cycling protocol is as follows:  
 
Cycle Number Temperature (°C) Time 
1 50 2 min 
1 95 10 min 
40 95 15 sec 
40 60 1 min 
  
8. After the protocol is successfully loaded, start the run  
9. After the run, apply the correct baseline to the data (may vary from platform to platform, 
i.e. 0.08 on ABI, 100 on CFX). Data can then be exported for analysis.    
 
<<PAGE 65>>
61 
Appendix A7: DogBact qPCR SOP  
Equipment and Supplies 
1.7mL low bind microtubes  
10, 100, 1000µL pipets and barrier tips  
Kimwipes 
DNA Away  
10% Bleach 
Minspin 
Vortex  
Microtube rack 
Laminar flow hoods (one for ‘reagents only’ and one for ‘DNA only’)  
Thermal Cycler 
TaqMan Environmental PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Catalogue # 4396838) 
2 mg/mL Bovine serum albumen (BSA), fraction V 
Forward primer-(DF475F): 5'- CGCTTGTATGTACCGGTACG -3’ prepared as a 100 μM 
solution 
Reverse primer-(Bac708R): 5'- CAATCGGAGTTCTTCGTG -3’ prepared as a 100 μM 
solution 
Probe-(DogBactP): [6-FAM]-5'- ATTCGTGGTGTAGC GGTGAAATGCTTAG -3’ BHQ1 
prepared as a 100 μM solution 
AE buffer (Qiagen #19077) 
Ultrapure water (Specialty Media, Phillipsburg, NJ #TMS-006-A) 
Plasmid containing target (at known copy number):  
DogBac Reference (i.e. sequence that can be inserted into a plasmid vector) 
5’-  
-3’ 
 
1. Prepare standards in a separate area from sample processing and qPCR areas.  
2. In the tube from IDT add 100µL DNase RNase free dI water. Let sit for ~40min. Use 
50µL for restriction enzyme digestion, and save the other 50µL for digestion later (you 
can digest the full 100µL in one batch if needed).  
3. Digest with Not1 following manufacturer’s instructions (or equivalent restriction enzyme, 
i.e. PVU1) 
4. Clean the digested product with the QIAGEN Plasmid Mini Kit following manufacturer’s 
instructions.  
5. Measure the final product’s A260 absorbance reading in triplicate. Use the absorbance 
reading from above to calculate the plasmid concentration in ng/µL. 
6. Calculate copy/µL using the plasmid size (provided by IDT) and the ng/µL concentration 
from above: 
 
6.023 x 1023 molecules/gram   =  Y plasmid molecule molecules/gram 
(X bp)(650 Daltons/bp) 
 
X=total # of bps in plasmid 
 
<<PAGE 66>>
62 
Use the absorbance to calculate the concentration of the plasmid in copies/2µL 
 
7. Prepare stock solution of 107copy/2µL based on the concentration above, and aliquot in 
small volumes for future use.   
 
Prepare standard curves from the plasmid stock solution prepared above. The curve should range 
from 1.00x106 copies/2µL - 1.00x101 copies/2µL. This range can be adjusted to encompass the 
most appropriate concentrations of target. Create the standard curve using a 1:10 dilution series. 
In addition to a standard curve, run negative extraction controls (NEC) and No template controls 
(NTC) run on each plate. 
NOTE: Use a dedicated Laminar flow hood containing all needed equipment when preparing 
master mixes for qPCR. Wipe surfaces with 10% bleach solution and let sit for 10 minutes 
before wiping away. Additionally, apply UV light to all hoods before and after use for at least 30 
minutes. If possible prepare DNA template in a hood separate from where reagents are prepared 
to avoid contamination. Always use disposable gloves and wear a lab coat.  
Master Mix Preparation  
Reconstitute dried primers with AE buffer as recommended by the manufacturer to create 100 
µM stocks. Reconstitute probes in TE (pH 8.0) at 100 µM stocks and aliquot for one time use.     
 
Prepare reagents in dedicated ‘Reagent only’ Laminar flow hood using dedicated laboratory 
equipment and supplies. 
 
1. Prepare respective MasterMix preparation as described below: 
 
Reagent Stock Solution 25 µL Reaction Master Mix (100 rxns) 
Environmental Master Mix 2X 12.5 µL 1250 µL 
Forward primer 100 µM 0.225 µL 22.50 µL 
Reverse primer 100 µM 0.225 µL 22.50 µL 
Probe 100 µM 0.075 µL 7.50 µL 
PCR clean water — 9.975 µL 997.5 µL 
DNA template — 2 µL — 
 
2. Transfer 23 μL of master mix into each 96-well plate. 
3. Cover tray with aluminum adhesive tape, label, and store in dark on ice for transport to 
‘DNA only’ hood for template inoculation.  
4. Vortex and spin all DNA templates before inoculation. Add 2µL of template to each well.   
5. Cover the inoculated plate with PCR sealing film and load onto the thermal cycler.  
6. Launch the thermal cycling software and create a plate setup. Clearly label each sample 
and the controls.   
  
<<PAGE 67>>
63 
 
7. The thermal cycling protocol is as follows:  
 
Cycle Number Temperature (°C) Time 
1 50 2 min 
1 95 10 min 
40 95 15 sec 
40 60 1 min 
  
8. After the protocol is successfully loaded, start the run  
9. After the run, apply the correct baseline to the data (may vary from platform to platform, 
i.e. 0.08 on ABI, 100 on CFX). Data can then be exported for analysis.   
  
 
 
<<PAGE 68>>
64 
Appendix A8: CowM2 qPCR SOP 
Equipment and Supplies 
1.7mL low bind microtubes  
10, 100, 1000µL pipets and barrier tips  
Kimwipes 
DNA Away  
10% Bleach 
Minspin 
Vortex  
Microtube rack 
Laminar flow hoods (one for ‘reagents only’ and one for ‘DNA only’)  
Thermal Cycler 
TaqMan Environmental PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Catalogue # 4396838) 
2 mg/mL Bovine serum albumen (BSA), fraction V 
Forward primer- CowM2F (5’-CGGCCAAATACTCCTGATCGT) prepared as a 500 μM 
solution 
Reverse primer- CowM2R (5’-GCTTGTTGCGTTCCTTGAGATAAT) prepared as a 500 
μM solution  
Probe- CowM2P ([6-FAM] AGGCACCTATGTCCTTTACCTCATCAACTACAGACA 
[TAMRA]) prepared as a 100 μM solution 
AE buffer (Qiagen #19077) 
Ultrapure water (Specialty Media, Phillipsburg, NJ #TMS-006-A) 
Plasmid containing target (at known copy number) 
CowM2 Reference (i.e. sequence that can be inserted into a plasmid vector): 
5’- CCCGTGTAAA ACGACGGCCA GTTTATCTAG TCAGCTTGAT TCTAGCTGAT 
CGTGGACCGG AAGGTGAGCC AGTGAGTTGATTGCAGTCCA GTTACGCTGG 
AGTCTGAGGC TCGTCCTGAA TGATATGCGA CCGCCGGAGG GTTGCGTTTG 
AGACGGGCGACAGATCGACA CTGCTCGATC CGCTCGCACC CGATCGATGG 
CATAGTTCTT CCGCATGGTA GATCATGAGT TCACATGTCCGGGATAATTA 
TTAAAGAATT TCGGTTGTCG ATGGGGATGC GTTCCATTAG GCAGTTGGCG 
GGGTAACGGC CCACTCGAGCTACGATGGAT AGGGGTTCTG AGAGGAAGGT 
CCCCCACATT GGAACTGAGA CACGGTCCAA ACTCCTACGG 
GAGCGTCAGGTTTGTTTCGG TATTGAGTAT CGAAAATCTC ACGGATTAAC 
TCTTGTGTAC GCTCTCGAGG ACCAGCTAAT GCATATAAATAAGTTACGTG 
ATGACGGCCA AATACTCCTG ATCGTACTCG AGATAGGCAC CTATGTCCTT 
TACCTCATCA ACTACAGACAAAATTATCTC AAGGAACGCA ACAAGCCCTC 
TAATGGAAAA TGGATGGTAT CTTTGGAGCC TTTGAAAGCA 
CTCGAGCCTTATGCATTGAG CATCGAGGCC GGAAAGCAGG AACTTATATA 
TAATAAGGTA TTAGCAGGCG AAGTATGGAT GGCTTGCTAAATTTGATGGC 
GACCGGCGCA CGGGATCCTA ACGCGTATCC AACCTTCCCT TATCCACGGG 
ATAGCCCGTC GAAAGGCGGATTAATACCGT ATGAGGTGCG GCCGCGGATC 
GACGAGAGCA GCGCGACTGG ATCAGTTCTG GACGAGCGAG 
CTGTCGTCCGACCCGTGATC TTACGGCATT ATACGTATGA TCGGTCCACG 
ATCAGCTAGA TTATCTAGTC AGCTTGATGT CATAGCTGTTTCCTGAGGCT 
CAATACTGAC CATTTAAATC ATACCTGACC TCCATAGCAG AAAGTCAAAA 
GCCTCCGACC GGAGGCTTTTGACTTGATCG GCACGTAAGA GGTTCCAACT 
<<PAGE 69>>
65 
TTCACCATAA TGAAATAAGA TCACTACCGG GCGTATTTTT 
TGAGTTATCGAGATTTTCAG GAGCTAAGGA AGCTAAAATG AGTATTCAAC 
ATTTCCGTGT CGCCCTTATT CCCTTTTTTG CGGCATTTTGCCTTCCTGTT 
TTTGCTCACC CAGAAACGCT GGTGAAAGTA AAAGATGCTG AAGATCAGTT 
GGGTGCACGA GTGGGTTACATCGAACTGGA TCTCAACAGC GGTAAGATCC 
TTGAGAGTTT ACGCCCCGAA GAACGTTTTC CAATGATGAG 
CACTTTTAAAGTTCTGCTAT GTGGCGCGGT ATTATCCCGT ATTGACGCCG 
GGCAAGAGCA ACTCGGTCGC CGCATACACT ATTCTCAGAATGACTTGGTT 
GAGTACTCAC CAGTCACAGA AAAGCATCTC ACGGATGGCA TGACAGTAAG 
AGAATTATGC AGTGCTGCCATAACCATGAG TGATAACACT GCGGCCAACT 
TACTTCTGGC AACGATCGGA GGACCGAAGG AGCTAACCGC 
TTTTTTGCACAACATGGGGG ATCATGTAAC TCGCCTTGAT CGTTGGGAAC 
CGGAGCTGAA TGAAGCCATA CCAAACGACG AGCGTGACACCACGATGCCT 
GTAGCAATGG CAACAACGTT GCGCAAACTA TTAACTGGCG AACTACTTAC 
TCTAGCTTCC CGGCAACAATTAATAGACTG GATGGAGGCG GATAAAGTTG 
CAGGATCACT TCTGCGCTCG GCCCTCCCGG CTGGCTGGTT 
TATTGCTGATAAATCTGGAG CCGGTGAGCG TGGGTCTCGC GGTATCATTG 
CAGCACTGGG GCCAGATGGT AAGCCCTCCC GCATCGTAGTTATCTACACG 
ACGGGGAGTC AGGCAACTAT GGATGAACGA AATAGACAGA TCGCTGAGAT 
AGGTGCCTCA CTGATTAAGCATTGGTAATG AGGGCCCAAA TGTAATCACC 
TGGCTCACCT TCGGGTGGGC CTTTCTTGAG GACCTAAATG 
TAATCACCTGGCTCACCTTC GGGTGGGCCT TTCTGCGTTG CTGGCGTTTT 
TCCATAGGCT CCGCCCCCCT GACGAGCATC ACAAAAATCGATGCTCAAGT 
CAGAGGTGGC GAAACCCGAC AGGACTATAA AGATACCAGG CGTTTCCCCC 
TGGAAGCTCC CTCGTGCGCTCTCCTGTTCC GACCCTGCCG CTTACCGGAT 
ACCTGTCCGC CTTTCTCCCT TCGGGAAGCG TGGCGCTTTC 
TCATAGCTCACGCTGTAGGT ATCTCAGTTC GGTGTAGGTC GTTCGCTCCA 
AGCTGGGCTG TGTGCACGAA CCCCCCGTTC AGCCCGACCGCTGCGCCTTA 
TCCGGTAACT ATCGTCTTGA GTCCAACCCG GTAAGACACG ACTTATCGCC 
ACTGGCAGCA GCCACTGGTAACAGGATTAG CAGAGCGAGG TATGTAGGCG 
GTGCTACAGA GTTCTTGAAG TGGTGGCCTA ACTACGGCTA 
CACTAGAAGAACAGTATTTG GTATCTGCGC TCTGCTGAAG CCAGTTACCT 
CGGAAAAAGA GTTGGTAGCT CTTGATCCGG CAAACAAACCACCGCTGGTA 
GCGGTGGTTT TTTTGTTTGC AAGCAGCAGA TTACGCGCAG AAAAAAAGGA 
TCTCAAGAAG ATCCTTTGATTTTCTACCGA AGAAAGGCCC A-3’ 
 
1. Prepare standards in a separate area from sample processing and qPCR areas.  
2. In the tube from IDT add 100µL DNase RNase free dI water. Let sit for ~40min. Use 
50µL for restriction enzyme digestion, and save the other 50µL for digestion later (you 
can digest the full 100µL in one batch if needed).  
3. Digest with Not1 following manufacturer’s instructions (or equivalent restriction enzyme, 
i.e. PVU1) 
4. Clean the digested product with the QIAGEN Plasmid Mini Kit following manufacturer’s 
instructions.  
5. Measure the final product’s A260 absorbance reading in triplicate. Use the absorbance 
reading from above to calculate the plasmid concentration in ng/µL. 
<<PAGE 70>>
66 
6. Calculate copy/µL using the plasmid size (provided by IDT) and the ng/µL concentration 
from above: 
 
6.023 x 1023 molecules/gram   =  Y plasmid molecule molecules/gram 
(X bp)(650 Daltons/bp) 
 
X=total # of bps in plasmid 
 
Use the absorbance to calculate the concentration of the plasmid in copies/2µL 
 
7. Prepare stock solution of 107copy/2µL based on the concentration above, and aliquot in 
small volumes for future use.   
 
Prepare standard curves from the plasmid stock solution prepared above. The curve should range 
from 1.00x106 copies/2µL - 1.00x101 copies/2µL. This range can be adjusted to encompass the 
most appropriate concentrations of target. Create the standard curve using a 1:10 dilution series. 
In addition to a standard curve, run negative extraction controls (NEC) and No template controls 
(NTC) on each plate.  
 
NOTE: Use a dedicated Laminar flow hood containing all needed equipment when preparing 
master mixes for qPCR. Wipe surfaces with 10% bleach solution and let sit for 10 minutes 
before wiping away. Additionally, apply UV light to all hoods before and after use for at least 30 
minutes. If possible prepare DNA template in a hood separate from where reagents are prepared 
to avoid contamination. Always use disposable gloves and wear a lab coat.  
 
 
 
Primer/Probe Mix Preparation 
Create batches of primer probe mix in the reagent hood using dedicated pipets with barrier pipet 
tips only. Reconstitute dried primers with AE buffer as recommended by the manufacturer to 
create 500 µM stocks. Reconstitute probes in TE (pH 8.0) at 100 µM stocks and aliquot for one 
time use.     
 
Table 1: CowM2 primer/probe mix for simplex applications. 
 
Reagent Stock Solution Primer/Probe Mix 
Forward Primer 500 µM 10 µL 
Reverse Primer 500 µM 10 µL 
Probe 100 µM 4 µL 
PCR clean water — 576 µL 
 
  
<<PAGE 71>>
67 
Master Mix Preparation  
Prepare reagents in dedicated ‘Reagent only’ Laminar flow hood using dedicated laboratory 
equipment and supplies. 
 
1. Prepare respective MasterMix preparation as described below: 
 
Reagent Stock Solution 25 µL Reaction Master Mix (100 rxns) 
Environmental Master Mix 2X 12.5 µL 1250 µL 
BSA 2mg/mL 2.5 µL 250 µL 
Primer/Probe Mix 3.5µL 3.5 µL 350 µL 
PCR clean water — 4.5 µL 450 µL 
DNA template — 2 µL — 
 
2. Transfer 23 μL of master mix into each 96-well plate. 
3. Cover tray with aluminum adhesive tape, label, and store in dark on ice for transport to 
‘DNA only’ hood for template inoculation.  
4. Vortex and spin down all DNA templates before inoculation. Add 2µL of template to 
each well.   
5. Cover the inoculated plate with PCR sealing film and load onto the thermal cycler.  
6. Launch the thermal cycling software and create a plate setup. Clearly label each sample 
and the controls.   
7. The thermal cycling protocol is as follows:  
 
Cycle Number Temperature (°C) Time 
1 50 2 min 
1 95 10 min 
40 95 15 sec 
40 60 1 min 
  
8. After the protocol is successfully loaded, start the run. 
9. After the run, applying the correct baseline to the data (may vary from platform to 
platform, i.e. 0.08 on ABI, 100 on CFX). Data can then be exported for analysis.   
 
<<PAGE 72>>
68 
Appendix A9: Rum2Bac qPCR SOP 
Equipment and Supplies 
1.7mL low bind microtubes  
10, 100, 1000µL pipets and barrier tips  
Kimwipes 
DNA Away  
10% Bleach 
Minspin 
Vortex  
Microtube rack 
Laminar flow hoods (one for ‘reagents only’ and one for ‘DNA only’)  
Thermal Cycler 
TaqMan Environmental PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Catalogue # 4396838) 
2 mg/mL Bovine serum albumen (BSA), fraction V 
Forward primer- BacB2-590F (5’- ACAGCCCGCGATTGATACTGGTAA) prepared as a 
500 μM solution 
Reverse primer- Bac708Rm (5’- CAATCGGAGTTCTTCGTGAT) prepared as a 500 μM 
solution  
Probe- BacB2-626P ([6-FAM] ATGAGGTGGATGGAATTCGTGGTGT [BHQ1]) prepared 
as a 100 μM solution 
AE buffer (Qiagen #19077) 
Ultrapure water (Specialty Media, Phillipsburg, NJ #TMS-006-A) 
Plasmid containing target (at known copy number): 
Rum2Bac Reference (i.e. sequence that can be inserted into a plasmid vector) 
5’- -3’ 
 
1. Prepare standards in a separate area from sample processing and qPCR areas.  
2. In the tube from IDT add 100µL DNase RNase free dI water. Let sit for ~40min. Use 
50µL for restriction enzyme digestion, and save the other 50µL for digestion later (you 
can digest the full 100µL in one batch if needed).  
3. Digest with Not1 following manufacturer’s instructions (or equivalent restriction enzyme, 
i.e. PVU1) 
4. Clean the digested product with the QIAGEN Plasmid Mini Kit following manufacturer’s 
instructions.  
5. Measure the final product’s A260 absorbance reading in triplicate. Use the absorbance 
reading from above to calculate the plasmid concentration in ng/µL. 
6. Calculate copy/µL using the plasmid size (provided by IDT) and the ng/µL concentration 
from above: 
 
6.023 x 1023 molecules/gram   =  Y plasmid molecule molecules/gram 
(X bp)(650 Daltons/bp) 
 
X=total # of bps in plasmid 
 
Use the absorbance to calculate the concentration of the plasmid in copies/2µL 
<<PAGE 73>>
69 
7. Prepare stock solution of 107copy/2µL based on the concentration above, and aliquot in 
small volumes for future use.   
 
Prepare standard curves from the plasmid stock solution prepared above. The curve should range 
from 1.00x106 copies/2µL - 1.00 x101 copies/2µL. This range can be adjusted to encompass the 
most appropriate concentrations of target. Create the standard curve using a 1:10 dilution series. 
In addition to a standard curve, run negative extraction controls (NEC) and No template controls 
(NTC) on each plate. 
 
NOTE: Use a dedicated Laminar flow hood containing all needed equipment when preparing 
master mixes for qPCR. Wipe surfaces with 10% bleach solution and let sit for 10 minutes 
before wiping away. Additionally, apply UV light to all hoods before and after use for at least 30 
minutes. If possible prepare DNA template in a hood separate from where reagents are prepared 
to avoid contamination. Always use disposable gloves and wear a lab coat.  
 
 
Primer/Probe Mix Preparation 
Create batches of primer probe mix in the reagent hood using pipets with barrier pipet tips only. 
Reconstitute dried primers with AE buffer as recommended by the manufacturer to create 500 
µM stocks. Reconstitute probes in TE (pH 8.0) at 100 µM stocks and aliquot for one time use.     
 
Table 1: CowM2 primer/probe mix for simplex applications. 
 
Reagent Stock Solution Primer/Probe Mix 
Forward Primer 500 µM 10 µL 
Reverse Primer 500 µM 10 µL 
Probe 100 µM 4 µL 
PCR clean water — 576 µL 
 
  
<<PAGE 74>>
70 
Master Mix Preparation  
Prepare reagents in dedicated ‘Reagent only’ Laminar flow hood using dedicated laboratory 
equipment and supplies. 
 
1. Prepare respective MasterMix preparation as described below: 
 
Reagent Stock Solution 25 µL Reaction Master Mix (100 rxns) 
Environmental Master Mix 2X 12.5 µL 1250 µL 
BSA 2mg/mL 2.5 µL 250 µL 
Primer/Probe Mix 3.5µL 3.5 µL 350 µL 
PCR clean water — 4.5 µL 450 µL 
DNA template — 2 µL — 
 
2. Transfer 23 μL of master mix into each 96-well plate. 
3. Cover tray with aluminum adhesive tape, label, and store in dark on ice for transport to 
‘DNA only’ hood for template inoculation.  
4. Vortex and spin down all DNA templates before inoculation. Add 2µL of template to 
each well.   
5. Cover the inoculated plate with PCR sealing film and load onto the thermal cycler.  
6. Launch the thermal cycling software and create a plate setup. Clearly label each sample 
and the controls.   
7. The thermal cycling protocol is as follows:  
 
Cycle Number Temperature (°C) Time 
1 50 2 min 
1 95 10 min 
40 95 15 sec 
40 60 1 min 
  
8. After the protocol is successfully loaded, start the run. 
9. After the run, apply the correct baseline to the data (may vary from platform to platform, 
i.e. 0.08 on ABI, 100 on CFX). Data can then be exported for analysis.   
 
 
<<PAGE 75>>
71 
Appendix A10: Pig2Bac qPCR SOP 
Equipment and Supplies 
1.7mL low bind microtubes  
10, 100, 1000µL pipets and barrier tips  
Kimwipes 
DNA Away  
10% Bleach 
Minspin 
Vortex  
Microtube rack 
Laminar flow hoods (one for ‘reagents only’ and one for ‘DNA only’)  
Thermal Cycler 
TaqMan Environmental PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Catalogue # 4396838) 
2 mg/mL Bovine serum albumen (BSA), fraction V 
Forward primer- Pig-2-Bac41F (5’- GCATGAATTTAGCTTGCTAAATTTGAT -3’) 
prepared as a 500 μM solution 
Reverse primer- Pig-2-Bac 163Rm (5’- ACCTCATACGGTATTAATCCGC -3’) prepared as 
a 500 μM solution  
Fluorigenic probe- Pig-2-Bac 113P ([6-FAM] TCCACGGGATAGCC [MGB]) prepared as a 
100 μM solution 
AE buffer (Qiagen #19077) 
Ultrapure water (Specialty Media, Phillipsburg, NJ #TMS-006-A) 
Plasmid containing target (at known copy number): 
Pig Reference (i.e. sequence that can be inserted into a plasmid vector) 
5’- CCCGTGTAAA ACGACGGCCA GTTTATCTAG TCAGCTTGAT TCTAGCTGAT 
CGTGGACCGG AAGGTGAGCC AGTGAGTTGATTGCAGTCCA GTTACGCTGG 
AGTCTGAGGC TCGTCCTGAA TGATATGCGA CCGCCGGAGG GTTGCGTTTG 
AGACGGGCGACAGATCGACA CTGCTCGATC CGCTCGCACC CGATCGATGG 
CATAGTTCTT CCGCATGGTA GATCATGAGT TCACATGTCCGGGATAATTA 
TTAAAGAATT TCGGTTGTCG ATGGGGATGC GTTCCATTAG GCAGTTGGCG 
GGGTAACGGC CCACTCGAGCTACGATGGAT AGGGGTTCTG AGAGGAAGGT 
CCCCCACATT GGAACTGAGA CACGGTCCAA ACTCCTACGG 
GAGCGTCAGGTTTGTTTCGG TATTGAGTAT CGAAAATCTC ACGGATTAAC 
TCTTGTGTAC GCTCTCGAGG ACCAGCTAAT GCATATAAATAAGTTACGTG 
ATGACGGCCA AATACTCCTG ATCGTACTCG AGATAGGCAC CTATGTCCTT 
TACCTCATCA ACTACAGACAAAATTATCTC AAGGAACGCA ACAAGCCCTC 
TAATGGAAAA TGGATGGTAT CTTTGGAGCC TTTGAAAGCA 
CTCGAGCCTTATGCATTGAG CATCGAGGCC GGAAAGCAGG AACTTATATA 
TAATAAGGTA TTAGCAGGCG AAGTATGGAT GGCTTGCTAAATTTGATGGC 
GACCGGCGCA CGGGATCCTA ACGCGTATCC AACCTTCCCT TATCCACGGG 
ATAGCCCGTC GAAAGGCGGATTAATACCGT ATGAGGTGCG GCCGCGGATC 
GACGAGAGCA GCGCGACTGG ATCAGTTCTG GACGAGCGAG 
CTGTCGTCCGACCCGTGATC TTACGGCATT ATACGTATGA TCGGTCCACG 
ATCAGCTAGA TTATCTAGTC AGCTTGATGT CATAGCTGTTTCCTGAGGCT 
CAATACTGAC CATTTAAATC ATACCTGACC TCCATAGCAG AAAGTCAAAA 
GCCTCCGACC GGAGGCTTTTGACTTGATCG GCACGTAAGA GGTTCCAACT 
<<PAGE 76>>
72 
TTCACCATAA TGAAATAAGA TCACTACCGG GCGTATTTTT 
TGAGTTATCGAGATTTTCAG GAGCTAAGGA AGCTAAAATG AGTATTCAAC 
ATTTCCGTGT CGCCCTTATT CCCTTTTTTG CGGCATTTTGCCTTCCTGTT 
TTTGCTCACC CAGAAACGCT GGTGAAAGTA AAAGATGCTG AAGATCAGTT 
GGGTGCACGA GTGGGTTACATCGAACTGGA TCTCAACAGC GGTAAGATCC 
TTGAGAGTTT ACGCCCCGAA GAACGTTTTC CAATGATGAG 
CACTTTTAAAGTTCTGCTAT GTGGCGCGGT ATTATCCCGT ATTGACGCCG 
GGCAAGAGCA ACTCGGTCGC CGCATACACT ATTCTCAGAATGACTTGGTT 
GAGTACTCAC CAGTCACAGA AAAGCATCTC ACGGATGGCA TGACAGTAAG 
AGAATTATGC AGTGCTGCCATAACCATGAG TGATAACACT GCGGCCAACT 
TACTTCTGGC AACGATCGGA GGACCGAAGG AGCTAACCGC 
TTTTTTGCACAACATGGGGG ATCATGTAAC TCGCCTTGAT CGTTGGGAAC 
CGGAGCTGAA TGAAGCCATA CCAAACGACG AGCGTGACACCACGATGCCT 
GTAGCAATGG CAACAACGTT GCGCAAACTA TTAACTGGCG AACTACTTAC 
TCTAGCTTCC CGGCAACAATTAATAGACTG GATGGAGGCG GATAAAGTTG 
CAGGATCACT TCTGCGCTCG GCCCTCCCGG CTGGCTGGTT 
TATTGCTGATAAATCTGGAG CCGGTGAGCG TGGGTCTCGC GGTATCATTG 
CAGCACTGGG GCCAGATGGT AAGCCCTCCC GCATCGTAGTTATCTACACG 
ACGGGGAGTC AGGCAACTAT GGATGAACGA AATAGACAGA TCGCTGAGAT 
AGGTGCCTCA CTGATTAAGCATTGGTAATG AGGGCCCAAA TGTAATCACC 
TGGCTCACCT TCGGGTGGGC CTTTCTTGAG GACCTAAATG 
TAATCACCTGGCTCACCTTC GGGTGGGCCT TTCTGCGTTG CTGGCGTTTT 
TCCATAGGCT CCGCCCCCCT GACGAGCATC ACAAAAATCGATGCTCAAGT 
CAGAGGTGGC GAAACCCGAC AGGACTATAA AGATACCAGG CGTTTCCCCC 
TGGAAGCTCC CTCGTGCGCTCTCCTGTTCC GACCCTGCCG CTTACCGGAT 
ACCTGTCCGC CTTTCTCCCT TCGGGAAGCG TGGCGCTTTC 
TCATAGCTCACGCTGTAGGT ATCTCAGTTC GGTGTAGGTC GTTCGCTCCA 
AGCTGGGCTG TGTGCACGAA CCCCCCGTTC AGCCCGACCGCTGCGCCTTA 
TCCGGTAACT ATCGTCTTGA GTCCAACCCG GTAAGACACG ACTTATCGCC 
ACTGGCAGCA GCCACTGGTAACAGGATTAG CAGAGCGAGG TATGTAGGCG 
GTGCTACAGA GTTCTTGAAG TGGTGGCCTA ACTACGGCTA 
CACTAGAAGAACAGTATTTG GTATCTGCGC TCTGCTGAAG CCAGTTACCT 
CGGAAAAAGA GTTGGTAGCT CTTGATCCGG CAAACAAACCACCGCTGGTA 
GCGGTGGTTT TTTTGTTTGC AAGCAGCAGA TTACGCGCAG AAAAAAAGGA 
TCTCAAGAAG ATCCTTTGATTTTCTACCGA AGAAAGGCCC A-3’ 
 
1. Prepare standards in a separate area from sample processing and qPCR areas.  
2. In the tube from IDT add 100µL DNase RNase free dI water. Let sit for ~40min. Use 
50µL for restriction enzyme digestion, and save the other 50µL for digestion later (you 
can digest the full 100µL in one batch if needed).  
3. Digest with Not1 following manufacturer’s instructions (or equivalent restriction enzyme, 
i.e. PVU1) 
4. Clean the digested product with the QIAGEN Plasmid Mini Kit following manufacturer’s 
instructions.  
5. Measure the final product’s A260 absorbance reading in triplicate. Use the absorbance 
reading from above to calculate the plasmid concentration in ng/µL. 
<<PAGE 77>>
73 
6. Calculate copy/µL using the plasmid size (provided by IDT) and the ng/µL concentration 
from above: 
 
6.023 x 1023 molecules/gram   =  Y plasmid molecule molecules/gram 
(X bp)(650 Daltons/bp) 
 
X=total # of bps in plasmid 
 
Use the absorbance to calculate the concentration of the plasmid in copies/2µL 
 
7. Prepare stock solution of 107copy/2µL based on the concentration above, and aliquot in 
small volumes for future use.   
 
Prepare standard curves from the plasmid stock solution prepared above. The curve should range 
from 1.00x106 copies/2µL - 1.00x101 copies/2µL. This range can be adjusted to encompass the 
most appropriate concentrations of target. Create the standard curve using a 1:10 dilution series. 
In addition to a standard curve, run negative extraction controls (NEC) and No template controls 
(NTC) on each plate. 
 
NOTE: Use a dedicated Laminar flow hood containing all needed equipment when preparing 
master mixes for qPCR. Wipe surfaces with 10% bleach solution and let sit for 10 minutes 
before wiping away. Additionally, apply UV light to all hoods before and after use for at least 30 
minutes. If possible prepare DNA template in a hood separate from where reagents are prepared 
to avoid contamination. Always use disposable gloves and wear a lab coat.  
 
Primer/Probe Mix Preparation 
 
Create batches of primer probe mix in the reagent hood using dedicated pipets with barrier pipet 
tips only. Reconstitute dried primers with AE buffer as recommended by the manufacturer to 
create 500 µM stocks. Reconstitute dry probes in TE (pH 8.0) at 100 µM stocks and aliquot for 
one time use.     
 
Table 1: Pig-2-Bac primer/probe mix for simplex applications. 
 
Reagent Stock Solution Primer/Probe Mix 
Forward Primer 500 µM 10 µL 
Reverse Primer 500 µM 10 µL 
Probe 100 µM 4 µL 
PCR clean water — 576 µL 
 
  
<<PAGE 78>>
74 
Master Mix Preparation  
Prepare reagents in dedicated ‘Reagent only’ Laminar flow hood using dedicated laboratory 
equipment and supplies. 
 
1. Prepare respective MasterMix preparation as described below: 
 
Reagent Stock Solution 25 µL Reaction Master Mix (100 rxns) 
Environmental Master Mix 2X 12.5 µL 1250 µL 
BSA 2mg/mL 2.5 µL 250 µL 
Primer/Probe Mix 3.5µL 3.5 µL 350 µL 
PCR clean water — 4.5 µL 450 µL 
DNA template — 2 µL — 
 
2. Transfer 23 μL of master mix into each 96-well plate. 
3. Cover tray with aluminum adhesive tape, label, and store in dark on ice for transport to 
‘DNA only’ hood for template inoculation.  
4. Vortex and spin down all DNA templates before inoculation. Add 2µL of template to 
each well.   
5. Cover the inoculated plated with PCR sealing film and load onto the thermal cycler.  
6. Launch the thermal cycling software and create a plate setup. Clearly label each sample 
and the controls.   
7. The thermal cycling protocol is as follows:  
 
Cycle Number Temperature (°C) Time 
1 50 2 min 
1 95 10 min 
40 95 15 sec 
40 60 1 min 
  
8. After the protocol is successfully loaded, start the run  
9. After the run, apply the correct baseline to the data (may vary from platform to platform, 
i.e. 0.08 on ABI, 100 on CFX). Export the data for analysis.   
 
 
<<PAGE 79>>
75 
Appendix A11: Horse Conventional PCR SOP 
Equipment and Supplies 
1.7mL low bind microtubes  
10, 100, 1000µL pipets and barrier tips  
Kimwipes 
DNA Away  
10% Bleach 
Minspin 
Vortex  
Microtube rack 
Laminar flow hoods (one for ‘reagents only’ and one for ‘DNA only’)  
Thermal Cycler 
Flash gel cassettes, camera, DNA ladder and dye (VWR Lonza starter kit, catalogue # 95015-
612) 
Voltage source 
Takara Ex Taq Kit (Takara, Catalogue # RR001AM) 
2 mg/mL Bovine serum albumen (BSA), fraction V 
Forward primer- HoF597 (5’- CCA GCC GTA AAA TAG TCG G -3’) prepared as a 10 μM 
solution 
Reverse primer- Bac708R (5’- CAA TCG GAG TTC TTC GTG -3’) prepared as a 10 μM 
solution  
AE buffer (Qiagen #19077) 
Ultrapure water (Specialty Media, Phillipsburg, NJ #TMS-006-A) 
Plasmid containing target (at known copy number): 
Horse Reference (i.e. sequence that can be inserted into a plasmid vector) 
5’-  
-3’ 
 
1. Prepare standards in a separate area from sample processing and qPCR areas.  
2. In the tube from IDT add 100µL DNase RNase free dI water. Let sit for ~40min. Use 
50µL for restriction enzyme digestion, and save the other 50µL for digestion later (you 
can digest the full 100µL in one batch if needed).  
3. Digest with Not1 following manufacturer’s instructions (or equivalent restriction enzyme, 
i.e. PVU1) 
4. Clean the digested product with the QIAGEN Plasmid Mini Kit following manufacturer’s 
instructions.  
5. Measure the final product’s A260 absorbance reading in triplicate. Use the absorbance 
reading from above to calculate the plasmid concentration in ng/µL. 
6. Calculate copy/µL using the plasmid size (provided by IDT) and the ng/µL concentration 
from above: 
 
6.023 x 1023 molecules/gram   = Y plasmid molecule molecules/gram 
(X bp)(650 Daltons/bp) 
 
X=total # of bps in plasmid 
 
<<PAGE 80>>
76 
Use the absorbance to calculate the concentration of the plasmid in copies/2µL 
 
7. Prepare stock solution of 107copy/2µL based on the concentration above, and aliquot in 
small volumes for future use.   
 
Use the plasmid stock solution prepared above as a positive control. In addition, run negative 
extraction controls (NEC) and No template controls (NTC) on each plate. 
 
NOTE: Use a dedicated Laminar flow hood containing all needed equipment when preparing 
master mixes for qPCR. Wipe surfaces with 10% bleach solution and let sit for 10 minutes 
before wiping away. Additionally, apply UV light to all hoods before and after use for at least 30 
minutes. If possible prepare DNA template in a hood separate from where reagents are prepared 
to avoid contamination. Always use disposable gloves and wear a lab coat.  
 
 
Master Mix Preparation  
Reconstitute dried primers with AE buffer as recommended by the manufacturer to create 100 
µM stocks. Reconstitute probes TE (pH 8.0) at 100 µM stocks and aliquot for one time use.     
 
Prepare reagents in dedicated ‘Reagent only’ Laminar flow hood using dedicated laboratory 
equipment and supplies. 
 
1. Prepare respective MasterMix preparation as described below: 
 
Reagent Stock Solution 25 µL Reaction Master Mix (100 rxns) 
Takara ExTaq PCR buffer (no MgCl2) 10X 2.5 µL 250 µL 
MgCl2 25 mM 2.0 µL 200 µL 
Takara ExTaq dNTPs (2.5 mM each) 2500 µM 2.0 µL 200 µL 
Forward primer 10 µM 0.5 µL 50 µL 
Reverse primer 10 µM 0.5 µL 50 µL 
BSA 2 mg/mL 0.25 µL 25 µL 
Takara ExTaq DNA Polymerase 5 U/µL 0.125 µL 12.5 µL 
PCR clean water — 15.125 µL 1512.5 µL 
DNA template — 2 µL — 
 
2. Transfer 23 μL of master mix into each 96-well plate. 
3. Cover tray with aluminum adhesive tape, label, and store in dark on ice for transport to 
‘DNA only’ hood for template inoculation.  
4. Vortex and spin down all DNA templates before inoculation. Add 2µL of template to 
each well.   
5. Cover the inoculated plated with PCR sealing film and load onto the thermal cycler.  
6. Launch the thermal cycling software. Note: It is important that a plate layout is created 
(in Excel/Lab Notebook) in order to keep track of which samples are running.  
  
<<PAGE 81>>
77 
7. The thermal cycling protocol is as follows:  
 
Cycle Number Temperature (°C) Time 
1 94 2 min 
35 94 45 sec 
35 61 45 sec 
35 72 45 sec 
1 72 7 min 
  
8. Once the run is completed, store PCR products at 4°C until visualiz ation on a gel, ideally 
within 24hrs of the PCR run. Use a double tier Flash Gel cassette. Mix 2 µL of PCR 
product with 2µL of 1X loading dye. Load all 4µL into the gel and run at 270 volts for 4 
min. Take multiple pictures. Note: Traditional gels can be made and used for 
visualization as well.  
   
   
 
<<PAGE 82>>
78 
Appendix A12: Gull2 Taqman qPCR SOP 
Equipment and Supplies 
1.7mL low bind microtubes  
10, 100, 1000µL pipets and barrier tips  
Kimwipes 
DNA Away  
10% Bleach 
Minspin 
Vortex  
Microtube rack 
Laminar flow hoods (one for ‘reagents only’ and one for ‘DNA only’)  
Thermal Cycler 
TaqMan Environmental PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Catalogue # 4396838) 
2 mg/mL Bovine serum albumen (BSA), fraction V 
Forward primer- Gull2 F (5’- TGCATCGACCTAAAGTTTTGAG -3’) prepared as a 100 
μM solution 
Reverse primer- Gull2 R (5’- GTCAAAGAGCGAGCAGTTACTA -3’) prepared as a 100 
μM solution  
Fluorigenic probe- Gull2 P ([6-FAM] CTGAGAGGGTGATCGGCCACATTGGGACT 
[BHQ1]) prepared as a 100 μM solution 
AE buffer (Qiagen #19077) 
Ultrapure water (Specialty Media, Phillipsburg, NJ #TMS-006-A) 
Plasmid containing target (at known copy number): 
Gull Reference (i.e. sequence that can be inserted into a plasmid vector) 
5’-  
-3’ 
 
1. Prepare standards in a separate area from sample processing and qPCR areas.  
2. In the tube from IDT add 100µL DNase RNase free dI water. Let sit for ~40min. Use 
50µL for restriction enzyme digestion, and save the other 50µL for digestion later (you 
can digest the full 100µL in one batch if needed).  
3. Digest with Not1 following manufacturer’s instructions (or equivalent restriction enzyme, 
i.e. PVU1) 
4. Clean the digested product with the QIAGEN Plasmid Mini Kit following manufacturer’s 
instructions.  
5. Measure the final product’s A260 absorbance reading in triplicate. Use the absorbance 
reading from above to calculate the plasmid concentration in ng/µL. 
6. Calculate copy/µL using the plasmid size (provided by IDT) and the ng/µL concentration 
from above: 
 
 
6.023 x 1023 molecules/gram   =  Y plasmid molecule molecules/gram 
(X bp)(650 Daltons/bp) 
 
X=total # of bps in plasmid 
 
<<PAGE 83>>
79 
Use the absorbance to calculate the concentration of the plasmid in copies/2µL 
 
7. Prepare stock solution of 107copy/2µL based on the concentration above, and aliquot in 
small volumes for future use.   
 
Prepare standard curves from the plasmid stock solution prepared above. The curve should range 
from 1.00x106 copies/2µL - 1.00x101 copies/2µL. This range can be adjusted to encompass the 
most appropriate concentrations of target. Create the standard curve using a 1:10 dilution series. 
In addition to a standard curve, run negative extraction controls (NEC) and No template controls 
(NTC) on each plate.  
 
NOTE: Use a dedicated Laminar flow hood containing all needed equipment when preparing 
master mixes for qPCR. Wipe surfaces with 10% bleach solution and let sit for 10 minutes 
before wiping away. Additionally, apply UV light to all hoods before and after use for at least 30 
minutes. If possible prepare DNA template in a hood separate from where reagents are prepared 
to avoid contamination. Always use disposable gloves and wear a lab coat.  
 
 
Master Mix Preparation  
Reconstitute dried primers with AE buffer as recommended by the manufacturer to create 100 
µM stocks. Reconstitute probes in TE (pH 8.0) at 100 µM stocks and aliquot for one time use.     
 
Prepare reagents in dedicated ‘Reagent only’ Laminar flow hood using dedicated laboratory 
equipment and supplies. 
 
1. Prepare respective MasterMix preparation as described below: 
 
Reagent Stock Solution 25 µL Reaction Master Mix (100 rxns) 
Environmental Master Mix 2X 12.5 µL 1250 µL 
Forward primer 100 µM 0.23 µL 23 µL 
Reverse primer 100 µM 0.23 µL 23 µL 
Probe 100 µM 0.008 µL 0.8 µL 
PCR clean water — 5.25 µL 525 µL 
DNA template — 2 µL — 
 
2. Transfer 23 μL of master mix into each 96-well plate. 
3. Cover tray with aluminum adhesive tape, label, and store in dark on ice for transport to 
‘DNA only’ hood for template inoculation.  
4. Vortex and spin down all DNA templates before inoculation. Add 2µL of template to 
each well.   
5. Cover the inoculated plate with PCR sealing film and load onto the thermal cycler.  
6. Launch the thermal cycling software and create a plate setup. Clearly label each sample 
and the controls.   
  
<<PAGE 84>>
80 
7. The thermal cycling protocol is as follows:  
 
Cycle Number Temperature (°C) Time 
1 50 2 min 
1 95 10 min 
40 95 15 sec 
40 60 1 min 
  
8. After the protocol is successfully loaded, start the run  
9. After the run, apply the correct baseline (may vary from platform to platform, i.e. 0.08 on 
ABI, 100 on CFX). Data can then be exported.   
 
<<PAGE 85>>
81 
Appendix A13: Lee Seagull qPCR SOP 
Equipment and Supplies 
1.7mL low bind microtubes  
10, 100, 1000µM pipets and barrier tips  
Kimwipes 
DNA Away  
10% Bleach 
Minspin 
Vortex  
Microtube rack 
Laminar flow hoods (one for ‘reagents only’ and one for ‘DNA only’)  
Thermal Cycler 
TaqMan Environmental PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Catalogue # 4396838) 
2 mg/mL Bovine serum albumen (BSA), fraction V 
Forward primer- CaT#998F (5’- AGGTGCTAATACCGCATAATACAGAG -3’) prepared 
as a 10 μM solution 
Reverse primer- CaT#998R (5’- GCCGTTACCTCACCGTCTA-3’) prepared as a 10 μM 
solution  
Fluorigenic probe- CaT#998P ([6-FAM] TTCTCTGTTGAAAGGCGCTT [MGB]) prepared 
as a 10 μM solution 
AE buffer (Qiagen #19077) 
Ultrapure water (Specialty Media, Phillipsburg, NJ #TMS-006-A) 
Plasmid containing target (at known copy number): 
Gull Reference (i.e. sequence that can be inserted into a plasmid vector) 
5’-  
-3’ 
 
1. Prepare standards in a separate area from sample processing and qPCR areas.  
2. In the tube from IDT add 100µL DNase RNase free dI water. Let sit for ~40min. Use 
50µL for restriction enzyme digestion, and save the other 50µL for digestion later (you 
can digest the full 100µL in one batch if needed).  
3. Digest with Not1 following manufacturer’s instructions (or equivalent restriction enzyme, 
i.e. PVU1) 
4. Clean the digested product with the QIAGEN Plasmid Mini Kit following manufacturer’s 
instructions.  
5. Measure the final product’s A260 absorbance reading in triplicate. Use the absorbance 
reading from above to calculate the plasmid concentration in ng/µL. 
6. Calculate copy/µL using the plasmid size (provided by IDT) and the ng/µL concentration 
from above: 
 
6.023 x 1023 molecules/gram   =  Y plasmid molecule molecules/gram 
(X bp)(650 Daltons/bp) 
 
X=total # of bps in plasmid 
<<PAGE 86>>
82 
 
Use the absorbance to calculate the concentration of the plasmid in copies/2µL 
 
7. Prepare stock solution of 107copy/2µL based on the concentration above, and aliquot in 
small volumes for future use.   
 
Prepare standard curves from the plasmid stock solution prepared above. The curve should range 
from 1.00x106 copies/2µL - 1.00x101 copies/2µL. This range can be adjusted to encompass the 
most appropriate concentrations of target. Creating the standard curve using a 1:10 dilution 
series. In addition to a standard curve, run negative extraction controls (NEC) and No template 
controls (NTC) on each plate.  
NOTE: Use a dedicated Laminar flow hood containing all needed equipment when preparing 
master mixes for qPCR. Wipe surfaces with 10% bleach solution and let sit for 10 minutes 
before wiping away. Additionally, apply UV light to all hoods before and after use for at least 30 
minutes. If possible prepare DNA template in a hood separate from where reagents are prepared 
to avoid contamination. Always use disposable gloves and wear a lab coat.  
Master Mix Preparation  
Reconstitute dried primers with AE buffer as recommended by the manufacturer to create 100 
µM stocks. Reconstitute probes in TE (pH 8.0) at 100 µM stocks and aliquot for one time use.     
 
Preapare reagents in dedicated ‘Reagent only’ Laminar flow hood using dedicated laboratory 
equipment and supplies. 
 
1. Prepare respective MasterMix preparation as described below: 
 
Reagent Stock Solution 25 µL Reaction Master Mix (100 rxns) 
Environmental Master Mix 2X 10.0 µL 1000 µL 
Forward primer 10 µM 0.63 µL 62.5 µL 
Reverse primer 10 µM 0.63 µL 62.5 µL 
Probe 10 µM 0.31 µL 31.25 µL 
PCR clean water — 3.44 µL 344.0 µL 
DNA template — 5 µL — 
 
2. Transfer 15 μL of master mix into each 96-well plate. 
3. Cover tray with aluminum adhesive tape, label, and store in dark on ice for transport to 
‘DNA only’ hood for template inoculation.  
4. Vortex and spin down All DNA templates before inoculation. Add 5µL of template to 
each well.   
5. Cover the inoculated plate with PCR sealing film and load onto the thermal cycler.  
6. Launch the thermal cycling software and create a plate setup. Clearly label each sample 
and the controls.   
  
<<PAGE 87>>
83 
7. The thermal cycling protocol is as follows:  
 
Cycle Number Temperature (°C) Time 
1 50 2 min 
1 95 10 min 
45 95 15 sec 
45 60 1 min 
  
8. After the protocol is successfully loaded, start the run  
9. After the run, apply the correct baseline to the data (may vary from platform to platform, 
i.e. 0.08 on ABI, 100 on CFX). Data can then be exported for analysis.   
 
 
<<PAGE 88>>
