
=== PAGINA 1 ===

First Steps Toward 
More Equitable Fines 
and Fees Practices   

Policy Guidance on Ability-to-Pay 
Assessments, Payment Plans,  
and Community Service 

=== PAGINA 2 ===

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

I.
Introduction: First Steps, Not Long-Term Solutions​………………………………………………….……...
2 
II.
Ability-to-Pay Assessments​……………………………………………………………………………………..…….
3 
III.
Payment Plans​………………………………………………………………………………..……………………...……….
6 
IV.
Community Service​……………………………………………………………………………………….………………..
8 
V.
Background​…………………………………………………………………………………………………….………..……..
11 
V.I Economic Hardship​………………………………………………………………………….….……...….……...
11 
V.II Waiving Fees And Reducing Fines​…………………………………………...….……………………….
11 
V.III Determining The Amount Of Fines And Fees Owed​……………...…….…………….……….
11 
V.IV Extraordinary Circumstances​…………………………………………………...….……………….……….
12 
V.V Certification Of Income Information​……………………………………………....…………….……….
 ​1​2 
V.VI Consequences For Missed Payments​…………………………………….……...…………………….
1​3 
V.VII Capping Community Service Hours​……………………………………………….……………………..
1​3 
V.VIII Developing Bench Cards……………………………………………….………………………………….…..
13 
VI.
Tools & ​Resources​………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..….1​4 

About The Fines and Fees Justice Center  
The Fines and Fees Justice Center (FFJC) is a national advocacy organization working to create a

justice system that treats individuals fairly, ensures public safety and community prosperity, and is

funded equitably. FFJC works collaboratively with affected communities and justice system

stakeholders to eliminate fees in the justice system, ensure fines are equitably imposed, and end

abusive collection practices.  
Contact Us  
Visit our ​website to learn more about fines and fees practices and reform efforts around the

nation. There, you can visit ​FFJC’s Clearinghouse​, an online library of the latest fines and fees

research, legislation, litigation and policy recommendations.   
Follow ​@FinesandFeesJC​ on Twitter to get the latest updates on local, state and national reforms. 
For media inquiries or to reproduce any part of this publication, please contact Jag Davies at

jdavies@ffjc.us​.  

Fines and Fees Justice Center 
Policy Guidance on Ability-to-Pay Assessments, Payment 
Plans, and Community Service  
1 

=== PAGINA 3 ===

I.  INTRODUCTION  
First Steps — Not Long-Term Solutions. 
The Fines and Fees Justice Center (FFJC) advocates for the elimination of all fees imposed in the

criminal legal system and for the imposition of fines only in cases in which the sentence does not

include a term of incarceration or supervision. If imposed, fines should be both tailored to the

offense and proportionate to an individual’s financial circumstances. Further, no fines or fees

should ever be assessed in juvenile cases. 
This resource provides evidence-based guidance for jurisdictions that currently have or are

looking to implement ability to pay assessments, payment plans, and/or community service as an

alternative to fines, fees, or other monetary sanctions.
By promulgating this guidance, FFJC

recognizes that in some jurisdictions interim measures like these have been or will be adopted –

and that to reduce harm to individuals, their families and communities, policy guidance is

necessary and helpful. This guidance in no way signals a retreat from FFJC’s policy goals of

eliminating fees in the criminal legal system and ensuring that fines are equitably imposed and

enforced.  
Ability-to-Pay Assessments   
An ability-to-pay assessment is the evaluation of an individual's ability to pay a fine, fee or other

monetary sanction. These assessments ensure that fines are proportionate and offer an interim

solution for jurisdictions that have not yet eliminated all of their fees.  
Payment Plans  
After a court conducts an ability-to-pay assessment, and appropriately waives and or reduces the

amount owed, reasonable payment plans are necessary to ensure that people can meet their

own needs, as well as the needs of their families, while paying off their court debt. Payment plans

are also useful in jurisdictions that lack the authority to consider an individual’s ability to pay.  
Community Service 
Community service offers individuals with an alternative to monetary sanctions that better meets

the community’s interest in public safety and accountability. When chosen by the defendant,

assigned in consideration of an individual’s family, work, or education obligations, credited at a

reasonable amount, and defined broadly, community service may offer an appropriate way to

comply with monetary sanctions.  
This guidance is most effective when all three of these policies are adopted and implemented

in unison. Together, these policies (1) ensure fairness, (2) are consistent with constitutional

requirements for the assessment of financial sanctions in the criminal legal system, and (3)

improve court efficiency and make it less costly for jurisdictions to monitor debt payment. 

Fines and Fees Justice Center 
Policy Guidance on Ability-to-Pay Assessments, Payment 
Plans, and Community Service  
2 

=== PAGINA 4 ===

II.  ABILITY-TO-PAY ASSESSMENTS 

1.
Before assessing fines, fees, or any other monetary sanctions, courts must make a finding

that the individual has the current ability to pay the amount imposed. If a person’s financial

situation changes, the court must allow the individual to request a new determination of their

ability to pay and a recalculation of the total fines, fees, or any other monetary sanctions

owed.  
a.
“Ability to pay” refers to the current capability of a person to pay court-ordered fines, fees,

or any other monetary sanction owed, without economic hardship.  
b.
Prior to imposing a fine and/or fee, courts have an affirmative obligation to inquire about

and assess a person’s ability to pay. 
c.
Notice of the jurisdiction’s obligation to determine ability to pay and to waive or reduce

fines, fees, or any other monetary sanctions due, must be provided in plain language: 
￫on any citation issued;  
￫on the court’s website; 
￫on any online payment site; 
￫in any court FAQs; 
￫at any hearing where fines, fees, or any other monetary sanctions will be assessed or

are at issue. 
d.
The notice must be translated into all applicable languages and include the process and

standards that will be applied to determine ability to pay. 
e.
Ability-to-pay assessments are not waivable by an individual or their counsel.  
1 The Fines and Fees Justice Center advocates for elimination of all fees imposed in the criminal legal system and for

the imposition of fines only in cases when the sentence does not include a term of incarceration or supervision. If

imposed, fines should be both tailored to the offense and proportionate to an individual’s financial circumstances. No

fines or fees should ever be assessed in juvenile cases. An individual must be convicted of an offense before a court

can assess fines, fees or other monetary sanctions. (​Nelson v. Colorado​) 

Before assessing fines, fees, or any other monetary

sanctions, courts must make a finding that the individual

has the current ability to pay the amount imposed.  1
Fines and Fees Justice Center 
Policy Guidance on Ability-to-Pay Assessments, Payment 
Plans, and Community Service  
3 

=== PAGINA 5 ===

2.
Ability-to-pay policies must include a presumption that some individuals will not have the

ability to pay any fine, fee, or other monetary sanction. The government bears the burden of

rebutting the presumption, but where it applies, courts must waive all fees within their

discretion and assess the lowest amount of a fine allowed by law. 
It must be presumed that a person does not have the ability to pay under any of the

following circumstances: 
￫current receipt of any needs-based public assistance/benefits; 
￫spent any period of time in a residential mental health facility within the last six

months; 
￫earns less than 100% of HUD’s “very low” individual income limit for public housing;  
2
￫developmental disability; 
￫total or permanent physical disability; 
￫minor (presently or at the time the offense was committed); 
￫experienced homelessness in the previous 12 months; 
￫currently in custody, sentenced to custody for at least 6 months, or released from a

term of at least 6 months in jail or prison within the past 12 months; 
￫eligible for representation by a public defender 
b.
If a presumption does not apply, the state must calculate a person's current total monthly

income (including wages and excluding any child support or Supplemental Security

Income),
and determine the number of persons in the family. ​In making these

determinations, the court must use the information provided by the defendant.  
The amount owed must be assessed according to the following guidelines: 
i. If a defendant’s income is greater than 100% but less than 200% of ​HUD’s “very

low-income” limit​, all fees must be waived and the defendant owes 25% of the fine. 
2 ​https://www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/il/il2020/select_Geography.odn 

Ability-to-pay policies must include a presumption that

some individuals will not have the ability to pay any fine,

fee, or other monetary sanction. 
Fines and Fees Justice Center 
Policy Guidance on Ability-to-Pay Assessments, Payment 
Plans, and Community Service  
4 

=== PAGINA 6 ===

ii. If a defendant’s income is greater than 200% but less than 300% of HUD’s “very low-

income” limit, all fees must be waived and the defendant owes 50% of the fine. 
iii. If a defendant’s income is greater than 300% but less than 400% of the HUD’s “very

low-income” limit, all fees must be waived and the defendant owes 75% of the fine. 
iv. If a defendant’s income is greater than 400% of the HUD’s “very low-income” limit, the

individual
will
owe
100%
of
the
fine
and
fee amount, absent extraordinary

circumstances. 

3.
After the court determin​es a person’s ability to pay and assesses any fines, fees, or other

monetary sanctions, it must allow payment p​lans as an acceptable payment method. The

court must also offer to convert the reduced amount to an alternative method of fulfillment —

such as community service. If a person is sentenced to a period of incarceration, payment of

any monetary sanctions must be deferred until at least 6 months after the person is released

from custody. No interest should accrue on the amount due.  

After the court determines a person’s ability to pay and

assesses any fines, fees, or other monetary sanctions, it

must allow payment plans as an acceptable payment

method. The court must also offer to convert the reduced

amount to an alternative method of fulfillment such as

community service. 
Fines and Fees Justice Center 
Policy Guidance on Ability-to-Pay Assessments, Payment 
Plans, and Community Service  
5 

=== PAGINA 7 ===

III.  PAYMENT PLANS 

1.
After determining an individual’s ability to pay and waiving or reducing fines, fees, or any

other monetary sanctions accordingly, courts must permit individuals to enroll in a payment

plan. 
a.
Courts must not charge a fee or down payment of any kind to enroll, nor should there be

a minimum total debt required to qualify for enrollment in a payment plan. 
b.
Defendants must be made aware of the availability of payment plans at the time the

citation is issued, when monetary sanctions are assessed by the court, in the event of any

default in payment, and at any time a person makes a payment. Policies must preserve

the right of individuals to request enrollment or an adjustment to the terms of a payment

plan at any time, given unforeseen circumstances or substantial changes in income. 
￫If a person incurs late fees or penalties because of a change in their financial

circumstances, those fees and/or penalties must be waived. 

2.
Required monthly payment amounts must not exceed 2% of an individual’s monthly net

income (including wages and excluding any child support or Supplemental Security Income)

or $10 — whichever is greater. 
a.
If a jurisdiction has more than one case open for a person against whom fines, fees, or

any other monetary sanctions have been assessed, the monthly payment plan must

include the amounts assessed for all of the cases. 

After determining an individual’s ability to pay and waiving

or reducing fines, fees, or any other monetary sanctions

accordingly, courts must permit individuals to enroll in a

payment plan. 
Required monthly payment amounts must not exceed 2% of

an individual’s monthly net income (including wages and

excluding any child support or Supplemental Security

Income) or $10 — whichever is greater. 
Fines and Fees Justice Center 
Policy Guidance on Ability-to-Pay Assessments, Payment 
Plans, and Community Service  
6 

=== PAGINA 8 ===

b.
A person’s monthly net income must include their total income from all sources minus

deductions required by law including, but not limited to, administrative or court-ordered

garnishments and support payments. 
c.
If a person makes 12 payments within 15 months, the remaining balance of the fines, fees,

or any other monetary sanctions owed must be forgiven. 
d.
If a person is sentenced to a period of incarceration, payment of any monetary sanctions

must be deferred until at least 6 months after the person is released from custody, with no

interest accrual. 
3.
Once a payment plan is established, the court must send frequent communications (e.g.,

texts, emails, mail, voice messages) and reminders before installments are due. 

4.
An individual must never be incarcerated, have their probation extended, be denied services,

or have their driver’s license suspended as a punishment for missed payments. A warrant

should never be issued or executed for any failure to pay. 
a.
Courts must utilize the following options when an individual does not make a timely

payment under the terms of the payment agreement: 
￫notify the person that an installment payment has been missed and of the process by

which the court can reconsider their ability to pay or to revise the terms of their

payment plan, if needed; 
￫revise the terms of the current payment plan (amount, number of payments per

month, payment due dates, etc.) or reassess a person’s ability to pay and adjust the

amount owed; 
￫offer alternate payment arrangements such as the completion of community service

instead of a monetary payment; 
b.
Court must not refer the debt to collections unless the court has determined that

nonpayment was willful. 

An individual must never be incarcerated, have their

probation extended, be denied services, or have their

driver’s license suspended as a punishment for missed

payments. A warrant should never be issued or executed for

any failure to pay. 
Fines and Fees Justice Center 
Policy Guidance on Ability-to-Pay Assessments, Payment 
Plans, and Community Service  
7 

=== PAGINA 9 ===

IV.  COMMUNITY SERVICE  

1.
After considering a person’s ability to pay and waiving or reducing fines, fees, or any other

monetary sanctions so that they are commensurate with a person’s ability to pay, courts must

offer community service as an alternative form of payment.  
a.
Community service can offset part, or all, of any monetary sanction owed to the court.  
b.
The choice of whether to pay money or perform community service must always be the

defendant’s. 

2.
Courts must be flexible and allow a wide range of activities to qualify as community service. 
a.
Courts must allow people to attend school, including online courses, GED test preparation

classes, job training, work readiness and life skills training, drug rehabilitation, social

service programs, and participate in other activities to fulfill community service hours. 
b.
Courts must partner with community organizations to create community service options

that include comprehensive sources of support and services, such as employment

opportunities, job skills training, and mental health and substance use evaluation and

treatment.   
c.
The
types
of
community
service
options
offered
must
consider
the
variety
of

circumstances that may impact a person’s ability to perform community service. 

After considering a person’s ability to pay and waiving or

reducing fines, fees, or any other monetary sanctions so

that they are commensurate with a person’s ability to pay,

courts must offer community service as an alternative form

of payment.  
Courts must be flexible and allow a wide range of activities

to qualify as community service. 
Fines and Fees Justice Center 
Policy Guidance on Ability-to-Pay Assessments, Payment 
Plans, and Community Service  
8 

=== PAGINA 10 ===

i.
Circumstances include, but are not limited to: 
￫significant physical or mental impairment or disability; 
￫pregnancy and childbirth; 
￫substantial family commitments or responsibilities, including child or dependent

care; 
￫work responsibilities and hours; 
￫transportation limitations; 
￫homelessness or housing insecurity; and 
￫any other factor the court determines relevant. 
ii.
If the court determines that the consideration of these factors indicates that

performing community service would impose hardship, the court must waive the fines,

fees, or any other monetary sanctions owed. 
d.
Individuals must not be required to pay a registration or participation fee,
including

insurance, for community service.  
e.
Courts cannot require individuals to perform more than 16 hours of community service per

month. 
f.
Participants must be afforded the same workplace protections as employees, at no cost. 

3.
Courts must convert the fines, fees, or other monetary sanctions owed into an amount of

community service hours that is appropriate given the original offense and the ​person’s other

commitments and obligations.  
Options include:  
￫Credit an hour of community service toward court debt at no less than twice the

state or local (whichever is higher) minimum wage.  

Courts must convert the fines, fees, or other monetary

sanctions owed into an amount of community service hours

that is appropriate given the original offense and the

person’s other commitments and obligations. 
Fines and Fees Justice Center 
Policy Guidance on Ability-to-Pay Assessments, Payment 
Plans, and Community Service  
9 

=== PAGINA 11 ===

￫If a person has a trade or profession for which there is a community service need,

the hourly credit rate for each hour of community service must be the average

prevailing wage for the trade or profession.  
￫Implement a cap on community service hours required to fulfil the entire sentence. 

Fines and Fees Justice Center 
Policy Guidance on Ability-to-Pay Assessments, Payment 
Plans, and Community Service  
10 

=== PAGINA 12 ===

V.  BACKGROUND 
Defining Economic Hardship 
“Ability to pay” refers to the overall capability of a person to pay the court ordered fines, fees,

and other monetary sanctions without economic hardship. At a minimum, a definition of economic

hardship should consider an individual's ability to pay the court-ordered fines and fees without

having to forgo basic living necessities such as food, shelter, clothing, medical expenses, or child

support. 
Waiving Fees and Reducing Fines 
Ability-to-pay determinations should include the application of presumptions where appropriate.

To protect court efficiency, an exhaustive list of rebuttable presumptions of inability to pay should

be considered where an individual asserts that their income or financial circumstances are so

limited that they have no disposable income and there is no amount they would reasonably be

able to pay without economic hardship. If any of the listed presumptions apply and the state is

unable to prove otherwise, the court should waive all of the individual’s fees within the court’s

discretion and reduce the fine to the lowest possible amount allowed by law. 
Determining the Amount of Fines and Fees Owed 
When a presumption of inability to pay does not apply, courts should conduct an assessment of

an individual's ability to pay. Once a court determines income, the guidance recommends

reductions in fines and fees that are aligned with the ​Housing and Urban Development's (HUD)

“very low” annual income limits​. Where a court does not have the authority to waive fees, the

court should reduce fees as permitted by law and factor any remaining fees into the calculation.

The HUD income limits are specific to each jurisdiction and updated annually; policies should be

adjusted accordingly. 
HUD defines family as one or more individuals who live together, not necessarily related by blood

or law. For the full explanation visit: 
See ​Illinois’ Criminal and Traffic Assessment Act for an example of a sliding scale fee waiver that

offers relief for defendants that earn up to 400% of the federal poverty level. In practice, that

means someone who earns between 200% and 250% of the poverty level is eligible for a 75%

waiver of court costs, a 50% waiver for income between 250% and 300%, and 25% if they earn

between 300% and 400% of the poverty level. 
As an alternative to using the ​HUD very low annual income limits​, jurisdictions can consider

implementing the ​Internal Revenue Services' Collection Financial Standards​. These standards are

used to help determine the ability to pay a delinquent tax liability and include an accounting of

necessary expenses, allowing a certain amount monthly for their family size. The standards for

Fines and Fees Justice Center 
Policy Guidance on Ability-to-Pay Assessments, Payment 
Plans, and Community Service  
11 

=== PAGINA 13 ===

food, clothing, and out of pocket health expenses apply nationally, while housing and utilities and

transportation vary by location. All standards are updated annually. 
Extraordinary Circumstances 
Where an individual earns over 400% of the HUD standard, the individual should owe the

standard fine and fee amount, absent extraordinary circumstances. To determine whether

extraordinary circumstances exist, a court should consider all factors relevant to an individual’s

current financial circumstances. After considering all relevant information, courts should exercise

discretion in deciding whether and how much of the fine and fee amounts should be waived or

reduced. 
Factor​s courts should consider include (but are not limited to): 
￫receipt of public benefits; 
￫employment status and net monthly income from employment; 
￫routine monthly costs (rent, utilities, food, clothing, transportation and child/spousal

support); 
￫household size/number of dependents; 
￫child/spousal support; 
￫mental or medical expenses for the conditions/impairments; 
￫likelihood of obtaining employment within 6 months/ability to earn; 
￫court ordered restitution; 
￫other debts; 
￫other extraordinary expenses 
Certification of Income Information 

All relevant evidence and sources of information should be considered to determine an

individual’s net income. To encourage participation and to avoid clogging the courts by delaying

determinations, courts should not require that information presented by defendants be certified.

All relevant evidence and sources of information should be

considered to determine an individual’s net income. 
Fines and Fees Justice Center 
Policy Guidance on Ability-to-Pay Assessments, Payment 
Plans, and Community Service  
12 

=== PAGINA 14 ===

Individuals should self-certify that the information they provide is accurate under penalty of

perjury.  
Where courts have reason to believe that information presented is false or inaccurate, the court

should document the basis for that doubt and request additional documentation. Courts can use

their own systems and public records to verify the information provided. Perjury or other formal

criminal penalties should not be enforced for providing incorrect information, unless there is

evidence of intent to defraud the court. 
Consequences for Missed Payments 

An individual should never face incarceration, have their probation extended, be denied services,

or have their driver’s license suspended for missed payments or nonpayment of fines and fees.  
Instead, courts should provide notice by texts, emails, mail, voice messages, while allowing at

least 60 days for the individual to respond and make arrangements before referring the debt to

collections. Once a debt is referred to a collections agency, courts should monitor for compliance

with the tenants of the ​Fair Debt Collection Practices Act​. 
Capping Community Service Hours 
Courts should consider imposing a maximum number of hours that can be required of an

individual choosing to complete community service. Courts should adopt policies that are flexible

and account for circumstances such as offense level, fine and fee amounts, personal and family

obligations, etc., and allow an assignment that is reasonable given the circumstances.   
Developing Bench Cards 
Courts should develop a bench card(s) that serves as reference for judges, courts and other

decision makers on the practical application of ability to pay assessments, payment plans, and

community service policies. 

An individual should never face incarceration, have their

probation extended, be denied services, or have their

driver’s license suspended for missed payments or

nonpayment of fines and fees. 
Fines and Fees Justice Center 
Policy Guidance on Ability-to-Pay Assessments, Payment 
Plans, and Community Service  
13 

=== PAGINA 15 ===

VI.  TOOLS AND RESOURCES   
ABA 10 Guidelines on Court Fines and Fees  
The American Bar Association’s Working Group on Building Public Trust developed guidelines for

courts assessing and enforcing court fines and fees. 
California Ability to Pay Tool  
California courts utilize an online application that allows applicants to submit to a judge a request

for a reduction in their traffic fine, a payment plan, community service in lieu of a fine, or more

time to make payment. The tool collects information on the applicant’s monthly income and

expenses and communicates with the applicant regarding their request via email within 10

business days.  
California Ability to Pay Form  
In addition to the online options, California courts utilize an Ability to Pay form for requesting a

fine reduction, payment plan, additional time to pay a fine, or alternatives to fines and fees. The

form, along with guides for using the form, are available through the Clerk’s office in multiple

languages. 
Washington Ability to Pay Tool 
This calculator is designed to help Washington judges set fine and fee amounts based on the

defendants’ ability to pay using self reported information regarding their offense, income, and

total debt. 
Michigan Payment Plan Calculators  
These forms help calculate an appropriate monthly payment amount for adult and juvenile

defendants.  
Seattle Payment Plan Application 
The Court allows defendants to apply for payment and community service plans for non-criminal

financial obligations. To participate, the Seattle Court requires a minimum payment of $25 per

month and a $10 administrative fee. FFJC recommends that courts implement a 2% annual net

income or $10 minimum and no administrative fee. 

Fines and Fees Justice Center 
Policy Guidance on Ability-to-Pay Assessments, Payment 
Plans, and Community Service  
14 

=== PAGINA 16 ===

Payment Plan Examples 
See ​Florida SB1328 and ​New York Senate Bill 5348B ​for use of the two percent or ten dollars

standard for monthly payment amounts. 
See ​Washington House Bill 1489​ for guidance on creating a unified payment plan system. 
See ​Louisiana Act 260​ ​for an example of debt forgiveness after 12 months of payment. 
Community Service Guides 
See ​Biloxi Municipal Court Bench Card​ for examples of activities available for community service. 
See ​Texas Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 43.091 for determining whether community service

would impose an undue hardship on the defendant. 
See ​California Penal Code § 1209.5 for guidelines on crediting community service at twice the

state or local minimum wage rate. 
See ​Florida SB 734 ​for crediting community service participation at the rate of the prevailing

wage for a trade or profession where there is a community service need. 
Protecting Low-income Families 
See ​What States Can Do: Criminal Justice Debt ​for guidance from the National Consumer Law

Center on reforms that states can undertake to protect low-income families from being trapped in

debt, and to prevent people from being punished or incarcerated because they can’t pay court

fines and fees. 

Fines and Fees Justice Center 
Policy Guidance on Ability-to-Pay Assessments, Payment 
Plans, and Community Service  
15 
