=== página 1 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROCUREMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
City Lacks Accountability and Control 
Over Computer and Other High-Tech 
Equipment 
 
 
August 2017 
 

=== página 2 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 12, 2017 
Trevor J. Day, Commissioner 
Procurement Department 
120 Municipal Services Bldg. 
1401 John F. Kennedy Boulevard 
Philadelphia, PA  19102 - 1685 
 
Dear Mr. Day: 
 
 
Pursuant to Section 6-400(d) of the Home Rule Charter, the Office of the Controller conducted a 
performance audit of the City of Philadelphia’s personal property inventory system.  Our objective was to 
determine whether city agencies are effectively accounting for and safeguarding their equipment.  A 
synopsis of the results of our work, which was performed in accordance with Government Auditing 
Standards, is provided in the executive summary to the report.   
 
 
We discussed our findings and recommendations with you and your staff at an exit conference and 
included your written response to our comments as part of the report.  We believe that our 
recommendations, if implemented by management, will improve operations of the City’s personal 
property inventory system.  Our recommendations have been numbered to facilitate tracking and follow-
up in subsequent years. 
 
 
We would like to express our thanks to you, your staff, as well as the agency heads and staff we 
visited during the audit for the courtesy and cooperation displayed throughout our work.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Very truly yours, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ALAN BUTKOVITZ 
 
 
 
City Controller 
 
 
cc: Honorable James F. Kenney, Mayor 
 
Honorable Darrell L. Clarke, President 
 
and Honorable Members of City Council 
 
Members of the Mayor’s Cabinet 
 

=== página 3 ===
 
 
PROCUREMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
CITY LACKS ACCOUNTABILITY AND CONTROL 
OVER COMPUTER AND  
OTHER HIGH-TECH EQUIPMENT 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
 
Why The Controller's Office Conducted The Audit 
 
Concerned about the risk of poor oversight with respect to computer and other high-tech equipment 
acquired by City of Philadelphia (City) departments, pursuant to Section 6-400(d) of the Home Rule 
Charter, the Office of the Controller (Controller’s Office) conducted a performance audit of the City’s 
personal property inventory system.  The objective of this audit was to determine whether City 
departments were effectively accounting for such inventory and whether they had designed and 
implemented controls to safeguard it against loss or misappropriation.  
 
What The Controller's Office Found 
 
The City does not have an effective system in place to maintain accountability over its computer and 
other high-tech equipment.  Our testing revealed that only 47% of the assets we sampled from the C400 
database could actually be located in the specified City department.  Moreover, the database contained 
a significant number of computer and other high-tech assets that are classified as “cannot locate” (CNL), 
some of which have remained in the database for years, even dating as far back as 1989.   
 
Our assessment of the C400 database suggests that the problems mainly occurred because (1) 
procedures to ensure that City departments internally and uniformly account for personal property have 
not been updated, (2) the Procurement Department does not maintain adequate control over 
sequentially numbered inventory identification tags, (3) City departments often did not conduct physical 
inventory without prompting by the Procurement Department, and (4) despite repeated attempts to 
have CNL items removed from the inventory database, there is confusion among the departments as to 
the proper procedures to follow.  As a result, departments’ ability to determine the need to acquire 
computer and other high-tech equipment may be impaired, departments cannot provide assurance that 
equipment is protected from loss or being used only as authorized, and valuable equipment could be 
easily misappropriated.  
 
What The Controller’s Office Recommends 
 
The Controller’s Office has developed a number of recommendations to address the above findings.  
Some of the more significant include: (1) establishing a uniform recordkeeping system for departments 
to track and maintain their internal inventory information, (2) maintaining better control over 
sequentially numbered inventory tags, (3) performing annual inventory counts in accordance with 
standard accounting procedures, and (4) ensuring that CNL items are properly and promptly removed 
from the City’s C400 database after three years. 

=== página 4 ===
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
Page 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Background .................................................................................................... 1 
Purpose of the Audit ...................................................................................... 3 
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
Lack of Accountability for Computer and Other High-Tech Equipment 
      Leave These Assets Vulnerable to Loss or Misappropriation ................... 4 
Over Fifty Percent of Recorded Computer and Other High-Tech 
Equipment Was Missing .............................................................. 5 
High-Tech Equipment Designated as CNL Frequently Remains 
on the City’s Database of Equipment for Very Long Periods ....... 7 
Multiple Factors Contribute to the Inadequacy of the  
Equipment Database ................................................................... 8 
Conclusions ..................................................................................... 14 
Recommendations .......................................................................... 15 
 
Other Matters Coming to Our Attention ..................................................... 17 
The C400 Database Continues to Reflect Inventory of  
City Departments That Have Ceased to Exist  ........................... 17 
The FJD Chooses Not to Follow City’s Property Directives ............. 18 
Recommendations .......................................................................... 19 
 
APPENDIX I: OBJECTIVE, SCOPE, AND METHODOLOGY ......... 20 
 
TABLES 
Table 1: Ten Highest-Dollar Items That Could Not Be Located ..................... 5 
Table 2:  Summary of Missing Equipment (by Department) ......................... 6 
Table 3:  Inactive Departments Still Showing Personal Property 
                    Assets ......................................................................................... 18 
 
FIGURES 
Figure 1: CNL Items (as Percentage of Department Computer & 
                    High-Tech Inventory) ................................................................... 7 
 
AGENCY RESPONSE 
Trevor J. Day, Commissioner, Procurement Department ........................... 21 
 
CONTROLLER’S OFFICE CONTACT INFORMATION .................. 25 

=== página 5 ===
INTRODUCTION 
 
1 | P a g e 
 
The Philadelphia Home Rule Charter states that the Director of Finance 
shall supervise the making of inventory lists of furniture and equipment 
(personal property) by every officer, department, board, commission or 
other agency having possession of City owned property.  The Director shall 
devise a system under which additions to and withdrawals from property 
shall be currently recorded, and he shall supervise the annual counting and 
reconciliation of such property with the City’s perpetual inventory records. 
 
The Home Rule Charter also gives the Director of Finance1 the ability to 
appoint the Procurement Commissioner, who is responsible for the 
operations of the Procurement Department (Procurement).  Among its 
many functions, Procurement is charged with compiling and maintaining 
current and comprehensive records of all real and personal property of the 
City2.   
 
Under the authority of the Finance Director, the Finance Department 
established Standard Accounting Procedure E-72-002, “Personal Property 
Perpetual Inventory”3, which specifically addresses Procurement’s 
responsibility for keeping the City’s central inventory records (also known 
as the C400 database), and implementing the property numbering and 
tagging procedures required to properly identify City-owned equipment. 
These procedures specifically recognize Procurement’s Inventory Control 
Unit as the entity responsible for directing and coordinating tasks such as 
acquisition, transfer, and disposal of assets, and affixing accountability for 
avoidable loss, destruction or theft of personal property.   A staff of three 
employees monitor and update the C400 database. The Office of 
Innovation and Technology (OIT) maintains the database software, which 
was originally created by a consultant in 1989. 
 
The heads of all departments are accountable for all personal property 
assigned to their respective departments and are expected to institute 
reasonable measures to safeguard this property against loss, theft, damage 
or improper use.  This responsibility may be delegated to subordinate staff. 
 
Accounting procedures previously required that individual items of 
personal property valued over $500 be included in the City’s central 
inventory for tracking purposes.  This threshold was increased to $750 as of 
July 1, 2016. 
                                                          
1 With the approval of the mayor, per Section 3-206(b) of the Philadelphia Home Rule Charter. 
2 Philadelphia Home Rule Charter Section 6-501. 
3 Originally issued on November 13, 1972 and amended in April 2016. 
Background 

=== página 6 ===
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
2 | P a g e 
 
When new equipment is needed, the requisitioning department will 
prepare a purchase order for Procurement’s approval.  The requisitioning 
department must then send a Tag Request Form, via email, to the 
Procurement Inventory Control Unit, which initiates the  assignment of 
sequentially numbered property tags in the C400  database.  The physical 
tags will be given to the requisitioning department and affixed to the 
purchased assets.  A Property Detail Report (or PDR) will be sent to the 
department requesting the name of the person who received the property, 
the name of the property custodian, the date the equipment was received, 
and the serial number of the item, if any. This information and 
documentation supporting payment for the equipment, must then be sent 
to the Finance Department, which enters the equipment value, payment 
voucher information, and “added to inventory date” into the C400 
database. 
 
Lost or stolen items to be deleted from the C400 database must be 
reported to the Procurement’s Inventory Control Unit using a Detailed 
Report of Loss Due to Shortage, Theft, Damage, or Irregularity Form, which 
first  must be approved by the Finance Department Accounting Unit before 
the Inventory Control Unit can remove the equipment from the C400 
database.  For items that are stolen, the department requesting deletion 
must also provide copies of a police report to support the department’s 
claim.  Procurement can remove scrapped items from the inventory, 
without the Finance Department’s approval, if a weight slip supporting 
disposal is submitted to them along with the Detailed Report of Loss Due to 
Shortage, Theft, Damage, or Irregularity Form. 
 
In a further effort to account for each department’s personal property 
inventory, the Finance Department issued Standard Accounting Procedure 
E-73214, “Cycle Physical Inventory of Personal Property”, to provide 
guidance to the individual departments on how to annually count and 
report on the personal property they possess. The annual inventory 
process commences with Procurement distributing a list of personal 
property that is assigned to each department. City departments then 
perform a physical inventory and a reconciliation of their personal property 
with the list provided by Procurement. The reconciled inventory listing is 
then sent back to Procurement to make any necessary adjustments. 
 
                                                          
4 Issued on February 24, 1961. 

=== página 7 ===
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
3 | P a g e 
 
As of June 2016, the City’s C400 database included over 121,000 pieces of 
equipment valued at almost $600 million.  Approximately 66 percent of the 
assets include, but are not limited to, computers, tablets, monitors, digital 
electronics, artwork, large power tools and firearms 
– items that, by their nature, are considered at 
higher risk of loss or theft than stationary, non-
portable, 
items 
such 
as 
office 
furniture, 
photocopiers, and air conditioners.  Additionally, the 
city spent an average of $32.6 million annually from 2014 to 2016 to 
update and replace their personal property.  Expenditures for computer 
equipment alone averaged $6.8 million each year. Accordingly, the 
necessity of safeguarding such valuable equipment cannot be overstated.  
 
Concerned about the high dollar amount of expenditures incurred for 
computer equipment and other high-tech portable equipment, the Office 
of the Controller (Controller’s Office) believed it appropriate to evaluate 
whether City departments were effectively accounting for such equipment 
and whether they had designed and implemented controls to safeguard it 
against loss or misappropriation.  Accordingly, we initiated this audit 
pursuant to Section 6-400(d) of the Home Rule Charter.  
Purpose of the 
Audit 

=== página 8 ===
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
4 | P a g e 
 
 
 
 
The City does not have an effective system in place to maintain 
accountability over its computer and other high-tech equipment.  Our 
testing revealed that only 47% of the assets we sampled from the C400 
database could actually be located in the specified City department. 
Moreover, the database contained a significant number of computer and 
other high-tech assets that are classified as “cannot locate” (CNL), some of 
which have remained in the database for years, even dating as far back as 
1989.  Finally, the inventory continues to reflect equipment belonging to 
now-defunct City departments, or agencies that have chosen not to follow 
the City’s property directives.   
 
The C400 inventory database did not accurately reflect the City’s 
equipment because: 
• 
procedures to ensure that City departments internally and 
uniformly account for personal property have not been updated; 
• 
the C400 database contains a large number of possible users with 
permissions to read, write, add, delete, and modify data, that 
cannot be traced back to the user;  
• 
Procurement does not maintain adequate control over sequentially 
numbered inventory identification tags;   
• 
neither the C400 database nor department internal recordkeeping 
systems contain sufficient data to always identify the location of 
equipment; 
• 
City departments often fail to conduct physical inventories without 
prompting from  Procurement; 
• 
despite repeated attempts by departments to have CNL property 
removed from the database, numerous items still remain in the 
inventory; 
• 
City departments frequently have inadequate controls over issuing 
equipment to their employees; and 
• 
some City departments have an unacceptable level of missing 
inventory identification tags. 
 
Because of the above inadequacies, departments’ ability to determine the 
need to acquire computer and other high-tech equipment may be 
impaired, departments cannot provide assurance that equipment is 
protected from loss or being used only as authorized, and valuable 
equipment could be easily misappropriated. 
Lack of Accountability for Computer and Other High-Tech Equipment Leave 
These Assets Vulnerable to Loss or Misappropriation 

=== página 9 ===
 
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
5 | P a g e 
 
Our attempts to locate personal property assets selected from the City’s 
C400 database found that the assets could be located and accurately 
identified only 47 percent of the time.  Specifically, of the 350 items 
sampled5 for the 29 departments we visited, 187 items, totaling $300,151, 
could not be found and most were presumed either lost or misplaced.  
Table 1 below illustrates the ten sample items showing the greatest value 
that could not be located. 
 
Table 1: Ten Highest-Dollar Items That Could Not Be Located 
Item 
 
Department 
Value 
GPS System 
 
Office of Innovation & Technology 
$16,665 
Life Pak 12 Defibrillator 
 
Fire Department 
$14,997 
Skid Mounted Generator 
 
Fleet Management 
$12,326 
Dell 192 GB Server 
 
Police Department 
$11,844 
Thermal Imaging Camera 
 
Fire Department 
$8,611 
Panasonic DVR 
 
Office of Innovation & Technology 
$6,590 
Thermal Imaging Camera 
 
Fire Department 
$6,138 
Multi-coupler 
 
Office of Innovation & Technology 
$5,926 
Self-contained Breathing 
Apparatus  
 
Fire Department 
$5,431 
Panasonic Toughbook 
 
Fire Department 
$5,306 
Prepared by the Office of the Controller  
 
Also included in the 187 missing items were 48 desktop computers, 29 
portable communication radios, 11 portable computers/notebooks, 11 
monitors, 2 cameras, an electronic easel, a sound system and a mountain 
bicycle that were not  identified as previously scrapped, donated or stolen.  
While the inability to locate these expensive items is troublesome, of 
greater concern are those missing items that could have an adverse impact 
on a department’s ability to perform its functions.  For instance, the Fire 
Department could not locate a stairchair or a pulse oximeter (a machine 
that measures oxygen levels in blood), in addition to the thermal imaging 
cameras, defibrillator, and breathing apparatus noted in Table 1 above – all 
vital life-saving equipment.  Similarly, the Water Department was missing a 
pneumatic jackhammer, a hand-held meter, two water pumps, and a 
paving breaker. The Police Department could only locate one of thirteen 
portable radios, the Health Department was missing an x-ray film 
processor, the Streets Department could not locate a paving breaker, and 
                                                          
5 Originally, 381 items were selected but 31 belonged to the First Judicial District or other now-defunct departments.  Refer to 
“Other Matters Coming to Our Attention” on page 17. 
Over Fifty Percent of 
Recorded Computer 
and Other High-Tech 
Equipment Was 
Missing 

=== página 10 ===
 
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
6 | P a g e 
 
finally, the Parks and Recreation Department could not find a pool vacuum 
or a commercial lawn mower.  Table 2 below provides a complete 
summary of the items tested, a count of the items lost or misplaced and 
their original value. 
 
 
Table 2: Summary of Missing Equipment (by Department) 
Department 
Items 
Selected 
from 
Records for 
Observation 
Items Lost 
or 
Misplaced 
Value of 
Items Lost 
or 
Misplaced 
City Council 
2 
1 
$659 
Office of Innovation & Technology  
84 
33 
$55,312 
Mayor’s Office 
1 
0 
$0 
Department of Housing & Community Development 
1 
0 
$0 
Office of Community Empowerment & Opportunity 
2 
2 
$1,628 
Managing Director’s Office 
4 
3 
$4,595 
Police Department 
51 
32 
$52,939 
Streets Department 
9 
4 
$3,919 
Fire Department   
25 
17 
$66,568 
Health Department 
28 
20 
$17,394 
Office of Behavioral Health and Individual Disability 
Services 
3 
3 
 
$3,654 
Department of Parks & Recreation 
15 
9 
$8,419 
Department of Public Property 
6 
6 
$5,944 
Department of Human Services 
20 
7 
$6,889 
Prisons Department 
14 
4 
$2,763 
Office of Homeless Services 
2 
1 
$3,619 
Office of Fleet Management 
6 
3 
$15,721 
Department of Licenses & Inspections 
2 
2 
$2,967 
Water Department 
40 
19 
$22,385 
Records Department 
1 
0 
$0 
Office of the Director of Finance 
1 
0 
$0 
Revenue Department 
7 
7 
$5,728 
Division of Aviation / Commerce Department 
16 
12 
$16,602 
Free Library 
1 
0 
$0 
Office of Property Assessment 
2 
1 
$1,576 
Office of the City Controller 
2 
0 
$0 
District Attorney’s Office 
3 
1 
$870 
Sheriff’s Office 
1 
0 
$0 
Office of the City Commissioner 
1 
0 
$0 
Totals 
 350 
 187 
$300,151 
 
Prepared by the Office of the Controller based on observations at selected department locations 
 

=== página 11 ===
 
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
7 | P a g e 
 
Our analysis of the C400 database as of June 2016 also determined that 
there were 4,765 portable electronics and other high-tech equipment 
totaling $7,231,316 that were listed as CNL items.  A recent Procurement 
memo stated that items deemed CNL for 3 years or more should be 
removed from the C400 database.  Yet, CNL equipment still remains in the 
City’s records, despite some of these items having been identified as 
missing over 20 years ago.  The oldest CNL item in the database was 
classified as such in December 1989.  Figure 1 shows the CNL items as a 
percentage of each department’s computer and other high-tech asset 
inventory total.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Water Department reported the most missing assets among the 
departments sampled in our testing -- 1,357 items. This amount represents 
over 16% of the total item count for computer and other high-tech 
equipment noted for that department on the C400 database, and nearly 
30% of similar CNL items reported for all the departments we sampled.  
While most of the Water Department’s CNL assets were purchased many 
years ago, several of the items were reported as CNL only a few years after 
the assets’ acquisition. 
 
The number of CNL items reported for the Department of Public Property 
indicates an even worse condition. As of June 2016, officials in Public 
Property asserted that 995 items could no longer be found in their 
department. This represents almost 78% of the department’s total 
inventory for computers and other high-tech equipment. The majority of 
Figure 1: CNL Items (as a Percentage of Department Computer & High-Tech Inventory)  
Source: Prepared by the Office of the Controller based on analysis of CNL Items in C400 Database 
High-Tech Equipment 
Designated as CNL 
Frequently Remains on 
the City’s Database of 
Equipment for Very 
Long Periods 
1.55% 
15.68% 
8.44% 
14.17% 
77.73% 
16.33% 
33.68% 
1.24% 
Police Streets Health Parks / 
Rec 
Public 
Property 
Water Revenue Other 
0.00% 
10.00% 
20.00% 
30.00% 
40.00% 
50.00% 
60.00% 
70.00% 
80.00% 
90.00% 
CNL Items 

=== página 12 ===
 
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
8 | P a g e 
 
these CNL items were reported missing in March 2007 – over 10 years ago.  
Other departments with a large number of missing items include the 
Revenue Department with 519 items, the Health Department with 504 
items, and the Department of Parks and Recreation with 439 items.  
 
Procedures to Ensure that City Departments Internally and Uniformly 
Account For Personal Property Have Not Been Updated  
 
While the Finance Department provides written procedures to 
departments on how to acquire and dispose of personal property (see 
Background information), the revised procedures do not specifically 
address the preferred recordkeeping method for City departments to 
maintain their own internal property records.  An earlier version of the 
procedures included information on the use of a card file to track asset 
acquisitions, transfers and deletions. However, as technology improved, 
this method of record-keeping became obsolete and now there are 
different interpretations among the departments as to how to internally 
track their personal property assets.  Some use the C400 database in lieu of 
their own internal records, while others use Excel spreadsheets, Access 
files, or paper documents filed in folders to store crucial data for the assets 
in their possession.  Still others have purchased or developed internal 
software applications designed for this purpose.  The Department of 
Human Services is employing Absolute DDS software while the Water 
Department uses an internal database linked to FAMIS6, the City’s 
accounting system. OIT has contracted with a well-known technology 
company to create another system that is currently under development. 
 
Furthermore, Procurement does not provide periodic training to 
department inventory technicians to ensure that those new to this 
responsibility understand the procedures and carry them out efficiently 
and effectively.  For example, we were informed that departments 
requesting removal of scrapped items do not always submit the weight 
slips as proof of disposal, so Procurement will not honor the request and 
the items remain in the inventory. Additionally, most departments did not 
follow accounting procedures by performing an annual count of their 
inventory, even in the absence of a formal request by Procurement.  
 
It has also come to our attention that not all departments followed the 
City’s policy that items exceeding $5007 should be included in the personal 
property records. It appears that individual City departments, and not 
                                                          
6 Financial  Accounting  Management  Information  System. 
7 Changed to $750 as of July 1, 2016. 
Multiple Factors 
Contribute to the 
Inadequacy of the 
Equipment Database 

=== página 13 ===
 
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
9 | P a g e 
 
Procurement, make the decision as to whether an item should be tagged.  
For example, vehicles are not tagged, or individually included in the C400 
database, but Fleet Management maintains a separate inventory to 
account for them.  The Streets Department’s “Bigbelly” street trash 
compactors, costing $4,000 each are not tagged or inventoried, yet bicycle 
kiosks purchased by the Mayor’s Office of Transportation and Utilities, 
costing between $27,000 and $57,000 each, are tagged. The Police 
Department does not tag bullet-proof vests, choosing instead, to inventory 
them as “clothing” rather than equipment.  As a result, the value of the 
City’s personal property inventory could be significantly understated. 
 
The C400 Database Contains a Large Number of Possible Users With 
Permissions to Read, Write, Add, Delete, and Modify Data That Cannot be 
Traced Back to the User 
 
The Controller’s Office found 380 possible users of the C400 database with 
permissions to read, write, add, delete, and modify data. The C400 
database does not record that a change has been made to a record, nor 
does it provide the ability to trace the change(s) to the person(s) making 
the change(s).    In addition, responsibilities for making changes to the data 
are not always assigned to specific individuals.  We observed that there 
were 20 generic user names that could access the C400 database.  We also 
found the names of 12 individuals who were not City employees or who 
had retired from City service.  
 
Procurement Does Not Maintain Adequate Control Over Sequentially 
Numbered Inventory Identification Tags 
An analysis of the C400 database revealed that as of September 12, 2016, 
there were 2,432 new inventory identification tags that should have been 
sequentially accounted for in the C400 inventory, but were not. Auditors 
found that the C400 database reported only 11,626 new tags issued during 
the 12 months prior to that date, but the sequential numbering of the tags 
(with a starting number of 658910 and ending with 672967) would appear 
to indicate that 14,058 tags were generated.  Procurement assigns the 
physical property tags in batches to their Procurement Special Services 
Officers (PSSOs), who work independently from other PSSOs when issuing 
tags to the departments. This resulted in series of tag numbers that were 
not yet assigned. 
Additionally, Procurement does not record the series of tag numbers 
assigned to each of the PSSOs, nor does it try to account for what was 

=== página 14 ===
 
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
10 | P a g e 
 
issued to departments during the year, thereby rendering the sequential 
nature of the numbering system useless for tracking purposes.   
We tested ten of the 2,432 tag numbers not included in the C400 database 
to determine the reasons why the numbers were omitted. Without a 
system in place to readily identify missing tag numbers in the database, or 
show corrections when tags were issued in error, the Procurement Special 
Services Supervisor had to individually research each missing tag number 
we selected. For the 10 items we tested, it was discovered that: 
• 
Three tags were issued to OIT for a laptop computer, a printer and 
a scanner that had already been assigned tag numbers. These 
three tags should have been voided in the C400 database. 
• 
Two tags were issued to OIT (on behalf of other departments) for a 
computer and related hardware, but the individual purchase 
orders were later cancelled.  These tags should have been voided. 
• 
One property tag was issued for the purchase of a computer that 
was found to be defective and returned to the vendor.  A different 
tag was issued for the replacement item.  The C400 database 
should have indicated that the defective asset was removed from 
the inventory and referenced to the replacement asset’s tag 
number. 
• 
One tag was issued for a defective monitor that was returned to 
the vendor.  A property detail search of the C400 database 
indicated that the asset was included in the inventory even though 
it did not appear in the Department Inventory List. The database 
should have indicated that the original asset was removed from 
the inventory and referenced to a replacement asset’s tag number. 
• 
One property tag for a portable radio purchased by OIT for the 
Police Department was physically lost.  A replacement tag with a 
new number should have been issued and so noted in the C400 
database. 
• 
One tag was issued in error when the purchased scanner was 
found to cost less than $500 (i.e. the minimum value required at 
the time for items to be included the C400 database).  The 
inventory tag should have been returned to Procurement to be 
voided or re-issued at a later date. 
• 
One property tag was lost and could not be accounted for. 

=== página 15 ===
 
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
11 | P a g e 
 
 
Neither the C400 Database Nor Department Internal Recordkeeping 
Systems Contain Sufficient Data to Always Identify the Location of 
Equipment 
 
The C400 database should be able to provide a user with the department 
and specific field location for all items in the inventory. However, we found 
that many field points in the C400 database are vaguely identified or 
incorrect. For example, since OIT (Department #04) often purchases 
computers and related equipment for other departments, items purchased 
for the Water Department (Department #28) were often coded as 04-028.  
However, the use of “04” as the prefix to the field location indicates that 
the assets are located within OIT, and not Water.  Additionally, even 
allowing for this deviation from standard practices of identifying asset 
locations, the “028” part of the field point does not specifically identify 
where in the Water Department, with multiple field sites across the city, 
the assets could be found.  Furthermore, the internal records of other 
departments affected by this situation did not contain sufficient 
information to provide assistance in locating the assets.  In five such field 
points sampled for OIT, we were only able to locate 12 of the 25 items 
selected. The unaccounted-for items included communication radios and 
personal computers. 
 
In other instances, we found that field points contained inaccurate or 
incomplete site names and addresses.  We observed this for field locations 
within the Parks and Recreation and Police Departments, where the 
locations noted in the C400 database did not reflect the actual site or 
address where the equipment was stored. 
 
City Departments Often Fail to Conduct Physical Inventories Without 
Prompting from Procurement  
 
Procurement has historically initiated the annual count of the City’s 
personal property by sending each City department pertinent sections of 
the C400 database.  Performing the physical count on a yearly basis helps 
departments safeguard the assets and provides a more accurate 
accounting of the inventory value for financial reporting purposes.  For 
calendar year 2016, Procurement provided the annual inventory lists to 
other departments as our fieldwork was concluding in December.   
Procurement did not request departments to perform a physical inventory 
in calendar year 2015 since problems were found with the C400 database.  
Of the 29 departments we sampled only three had performed an annual 

=== página 16 ===
 
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
12 | P a g e 
 
inventory for calendar year 2015.   This was in contrast to calendar year 
2014 when all but two of the sampled departments performed the annual 
count.   
 
Despite Repeated Attempts by Departments to Have CNL Property 
Removed From the Database, Numerous Items Still Remain in the 
Inventory  
 
The deletion of personal property assets from the City’s C400 database is 
performed only by authorized Procurement employees. Many of the 
inventory technicians in the departments we tested believed that 
Procurement was not timely updating their files by removing property 
previously requested to be deleted.  However, many seemed unaware that 
when items are donated, lost or stolen, they are required to receive 
written authorization from to the Finance Department before Procurement 
can remove these items from the inventory.  Likewise, when items are 
scrapped, departments need to provide Procurement with the weight slip 
supporting the disposal of the items. 
 
Our testing found that several of the 187 items we couldn’t locate were 
reported by the departments as having been previously disposed of.  Two 
missing notebook computers once owned by the Mayor’s Office of 
Community Empowerment and Opportunity were donated to a 
subrecipient agency in August 2015 and the request for removal from the 
records was timely reported to Procurement. However, the items still 
remained in the C400 database as of June 2016.  It could not be 
determined if written authorization from the Finance Department was 
included with the formal request for deletion.  In another instance, two 
items at the Health Department, an exam table and a hypodermic injector, 
were reportedly scrapped in May 2008.  While the Health Department was 
able to provide an email to Procurement, dated in 2008, requesting that 
the injector be removed, it appears that a weight slip did not accompany 
the request, so Procurement did not remove the item.  Consequently, 
removal would now require an approval from the Finance Department. 
However, there were other instances where a weight slip was provided to 
us along with the request to Procurement, yet the items remained in the 
inventory. 
 
Confusion regarding the procedures departments should follow when 
requesting removal of their CNL items could have contributed to the 
problem. While the City’s accounting procedures required the approval of 
the Finance Department for all lost or misplaced items, a June 2016 memo 

=== página 17 ===
 
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
13 | P a g e 
 
from Procurement stated that the Finance Department authorized the 
removal of all items designated as CNL for at least three years, provided 
that department heads submit a written certification about the lost status 
of the items to Procurement.   Many of the departments have also stated 
that even when they timely complete the required CNL paperwork, 
Procurement does not act on these requests.   Yet, Procurement stated 
that it cannot remove the items without written approval from the Finance 
Department.  Several departments have long-term CNL items that should 
be have been removed years ago, including but not limited to, the Police, 
Commerce and Streets Departments with CNL items dating back to 2000, 
and the Office of the Managing Director and the Water Department with 
CNLs going back to 2001 and 2003, respectively. 
 
Our testing confirmed the confusion involved in removing CNL property. Of 
the 187 items that could not be located, 23 were previously designated as 
CNL.  This included a $955 salt spreader in the Parks and Recreation 
Department that was reported missing in September 2005, a $3,600 tractor 
mower in the Office of Homeless Services missing since December 2007, 
and three radios in the Department of Public Property, missing since March 
2007, with a total value of $2,680. Continuing to carry these outstanding 
items in the database makes the process of conducting the physical count 
more difficult and time-consuming. 
 
City Departments Frequently Have Inadequate Controls Over Issuing 
Equipment to Their Employees 
 
When department equipment is issued to specific individuals for their use 
only, it is especially important to keep complete and accurate records so 
that these assets may be easily located and quickly retrieved, if necessary. 
In several of the departments we tested, it did not appear that those 
responsible for tracking such equipment kept adequate records that would 
allow the department to easily match the asset to the C400 database, 
thereby assisting department technicians in conducting their annual 
physical inventories. For example, mobile radios (i.e. walkie-talkies) 
distributed by OIT for various departments could not be readily located 
since none of the departments maintained internal records that included 
the City assigned tag number.  Instead, they catalogued the radios using 
the name of the employee to whom the radio was issued, and/or the 
item’s serial number, which is not a required field in the C400 database. 
Consequently, there is no easy method to determine what tag number 
belongs with what serial number or which employee.  When we requested 
the departments’ assistance in locating the fourteen radios, only one could 

=== página 18 ===
 
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
14 | P a g e 
 
be found due to the inability to match the tag numbers we selected to the 
assets on their internal records. 
 
Some City Agencies Have An Unacceptable Level of Missing Inventory 
Identification Tags 
 
During our review, we observed that the City assigned property tags are 
not always found on the assets, as required by standard accounting 
procedures.  Daily wear and tear of frequently handled assets often causes 
the tags to fall off or become unreadable.  Additionally, departments 
sometimes choose not to attach the tag to the asset knowing the likelihood 
that it will be lost or damaged by heavy use.  This situation was noted for 
mobile radios in both the Police and Fire Departments, as property tags 
could not be observed for several of the items.   
 
Furthermore, auditors observed an industrial air-conditioner, without a 
property tag, which was reportedly transferred from the Department of 
Public Property to City Council. The paperwork was filed with Procurement, 
but the required property tag number was not included on the form.   
Auditors performed a serial number search of the C400 database to 
determine if the asset could be found in the official records, but without 
the serial number being a required field in the database, no match could be 
made.  City management did not know how it acquired the air-conditioner, 
why no tag was attached to the item, or whether it was properly assigned 
to City Council.    
 
If the C400 database is intended to accurately account for equipment 
owned and used by the City, then it must be managed more effectively. 
The conditions noted above limit the Procurement Department’s ability to 
physically safeguard its computer and high-tech equipment from loss or 
misappropriation, while also properly reflecting the assets in its financial 
records.   The Procurement Department should provide record-keeping 
guidance to City departments maintaining the City’s property. The Finance 
Department should also authorize Procurement to make timely and 
accurate corrections to the City’s inventory records when departments 
communicate that adjustments are necessary, and it must ensure that all 
personal property exceeding a value of $750 is included in the property 
database.  Individual City departments must also do their part by 
conducting annual inventories when required to ensure the integrity of the 
City records, timely communicating required corrections to Procurement, 
and complying with property tagging procedures included in the City’s 
accounting procedures.   
Conclusions 

=== página 19 ===
 
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
15 | P a g e 
 
 
To ensure that the City has an effective system in place to maintain 
accountability over its computer and other high-tech equipment, we 
recommend that Procurement work with individual City departments to: 
 
• 
Establish a uniform recordkeeping system for departments to 
record and maintain their internal inventory records [203816.01].   
Sophisticated, smart technology could provide the type of record-
keeping system that would enable the City departments to better 
maintain their inventory. With an eye to going city-wide, 
Procurement, with the assistance of OIT, should investigate new 
software options to identify the one that is most efficient and cost-
effective.  Furthermore, Procurement should offer periodic training 
for City inventory technicians so those new to this responsibility, or 
just in need of a refresher, can carry out their duties efficiently and 
effectively.  
 
• 
Ensure that all personal property exceeding $750 is included in 
the C400 database [203816.02].  This would require the 
Procurement and Finance Departments to take an active role in 
determining whether newly purchased items, and those not tagged 
due to past department practices, are ultimately tagged and placed 
into the C400 database. 
 
• 
Ensure the list of users with the ability to write, add, delete, and 
modify data on the C400 database is limited to only authorized 
users [203816.03]. Procurement, with the assistance of OIT, needs 
to remove all rights under generic user names and ensure that only 
active City employees have the ability to access the database. 
 
• 
Maintain better control over sequentially numbered inventory 
identification tags [203816.04].  Procurement’s Inventory Control 
Unit  should secure the unused inventory identification tags in one 
place and eliminate the practice of assigning batched sets of tags 
to PSSOs.  The six employees in the Unit should be required to 
select the tags, to be sent to departments, from the next available 
number(s) in the sequence.  Individual City departments should be 
instructed to return all unused  or erroneously received tags to the 
Inventory Control Unit for cancellation or possible re-use.  The 
C400 database should also include notations that would allow the 
user to identify defective assets returned to the vendor, and the 
assets that replaced them.  Additionally, the Procurement Special 
Recommendations 

=== página 20 ===
 
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
16 | P a g e 
 
Services Supervisor should periodically search for and investigate 
missing tag numbers in the C400 database to ensure that all 
property tags are accounted for. 
 
• 
Maintain accurate inventory records that identify the proper field 
locations where property is used or stored [203816.05].  
Equipment purchased by OIT on behalf of other departments 
should be reported under the department and unit with physical 
custody of the asset.  When conducting their annual physical 
inventory, City departments must also be required to inform 
Procurement when assets are moved from one unit location to 
another.  
 
• 
Perform annual physical inventory counts in accordance with the 
City’s 
Standard 
Accounting 
Procedures8 
[203816.06]. 
Procurement  and the Finance Department should require the 
performance of an annual equipment inventory, even if not 
formally requested to do so each year. The individual department 
inventory results would continue to be signed by the respective 
department head, as evidence that he/she acknowledges 
accountability 
for 
the 
inventory 
in 
his/her 
possession.  
Procurement, in conjunction with the Finance Office, should 
consider whether failure to submit timely inventory counts should 
result in possible loss or delay of future equipment purchases. 
 
• 
Ensure that CNL items are properly removed from the C400 
database after three years [203816.07].  Procurement should 
timely remove the CNL items from the C400 database after 
receiving authorization from Finance.  This would better represent 
the total count and actual costs for assets physically in the City’s 
inventory. Going forward, Procurement should require department 
inventory technicians to maintain internal records that show the 
name of the person to whom the asset was issued, or into what 
unit it was placed. Transfer of assets between individuals, units, or 
departments should be prohibited, without the consent of the 
department inventory technician and the department head. 
 
• 
Establish adequate controls over portable equipment issued to 
employees [203816.08].  Individual City departments need to 
maintain internal records that include the name of the person to 
                                                          
8 Specifically, Standard Accounting Procedure E-7321, “Cycle Physical Inventory of Personal Property”- Issued February 24, 
1961. 

=== página 21 ===
 
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
17 | P a g e 
 
whom the asset was issued, the City’s inventory tag number and 
other unique identifiers, such as serial numbers, that would allow 
the department to easily match the item to the C400 database or 
locate the asset, if necessary.    
 
• 
Ensure that inventory identification tags are affixed to all 
equipment or make certain that the C400 database includes 
additional identifying information to easily allow the user to 
locate an item, when requested [203816.09].   For those assets 
subject to frequent handling that would cause wear or destruction 
of the inventory tag, departments should be required to report the 
serial number, or other unique identification numbers, to 
Procurement for inclusion in the C400 database. Finance should 
withhold payment for the equipment until all information required 
on the Property Detail Report is provided. This would assist 
database users or department management to easily match an 
item to the C400 database.  
 
As part of our audit work, we observed two additional matters that we 
believe require City management’s attention.  In our opinion, these 
matters directly impact the Procurement’s ability to properly report and 
account for all equipment purchased by the City. Each of the matters is 
discussed below. 
 
Despite changes to the structure of City government over the years, which 
included the elimination and merging of City departments, the C400 
database continues to reflect separate inventories for several now-defunct 
departments, and well as for court agencies that are integrated within the 
First Judicial District of Pennsylvania (FJD).   
 
As of June 2016, the C400 database still included 1,322 inventory items, 
with an original valuation of $1.9 million, for eight departments that should 
have been removed from the City’s records several years ago.  Included in 
this list are the Youth Study Center, which was placed under the control of 
the Department of Human Services in 1989, the Philadelphia Convention 
and Civic Center, which was demolished in 2005, and Traffic Court which 
was abolished by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in June 2013.  The list 
also includes a separate inventory for Municipal Court.  While Traffic Court9 
and Municipal Court are judicial divisions of the FJD, it is not clear whether 
the inventory items included in the C400 database were transferred to the 
FJD. The City’s C400 inventory still reflects both courts as separate 
                                                          
9 Replaced by the Municipal Court’s Traffic Division. 
The C400 Database 
Continues to Reflect 
Inventory of City 
Departments That Have 
Ceased to Exist  
 
Other Matters 
Coming to Our 
Attention 
 

=== página 22 ===
 
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
18 | P a g e 
 
departments with a combined total of 826 pieces of equipment assigned to 
them. Equipment still reflected in the records for all these locations include 
office furniture, stage equipment, an x-ray machine, boats, copiers and 
computers. Table 3 below shows asset counts for inactive City departments 
that are still included on the C400 database. 
 
Table 3: Inactive Departments Still Showing Personal Property Assets  
Department 
Number of 
Items 
Inventory Cost 
Tax Reform Commission 
33 
$54,868 
Anti-Graffiti Network 
9 
$16,495 
Camp William Penn 
48 
$67,222 
Philadelphia Convention and Civic Center 
290 
$538,175 
Youth Study Center 
103 
$93,773 
Traffic Court 
290 
$345,177 
Unknown 
13 
$8,203 
Municipal Court 
536 
$816,414 
Totals 
1,322 
$1,940,327 
Prepared by the Office of the Controller 
 
 
When we attempted to perform our search for selected items identified as 
FJD property, FJD officials refused to assist us, claiming that they have 
autonomy from the City for the purpose of maintaining property records. 
They stated that the Commonwealth oversees their personal property 
since they make equipment purchases on their behalf10.   They further 
stated that, as a district office of the Pennsylvania court system, their 
personal property should not be part of the City’s inventory.  In 2014, 
Procurement accepted the FJD’s position and consequently, no longer has 
access to the FJD’s property records.   
 
This situation presents Procurement, and the City, with a complex issue 
involving jurisdiction over personal property assets.  Despite accepting 
FJD’s arguments that their inventory should no longer be presented with 
the City’s personal property assets, Procurement still carries $16.7 million 
of FJD property in its C400 database.  Likewise, the Finance Department 
includes the FJD inventory costs in its annual financial statements. 
Additionally, the Philadelphia Home Rule Charter11 authorizes the Finance 
                                                          
10 Through the Administrative Office of Pennsylvania Courts (AOPC). 
11 Section 6-102(b). 
The FJD Chooses Not 
to Follow City’s 
Property Directives  

=== página 23 ===
 
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
19 | P a g e 
 
Director (and by virtue of delegation, Procurement) to oversee ALL city-
owned property.  Given that the City reimburses the Commonwealth for all 
equipment purchases and provides the funds for FJD operations (i.e. 
payroll costs and other purchased services), it can be argued that the 
assets purchased through the Commonwealth are, in reality, City-owned 
property, and therefore, should be accounted for as such. 
 
We recommend that Procurement: 
 
• 
Remove all equipment from the C400 database relating to the 
eight now-defunct City departments [203816.10].  
 
• 
Seek a ruling from the City Solicitor’s Office or possibly 
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine if the FJD’s position 
to remove itself from City oversight for matters such as 
equipment recordkeeping, is valid and consistent with how other 
courts are managed in the Commonwealth [203816.11].   
 
Recommendations 
 

=== página 24 ===
APPENDIX I: OBJECTIVE, SCOPE, AND METHODOLOGY 
 
20 | P a g e 
 
This appendix provides information on the scope of work and methodology 
we used to asertain whether City departments are effectively accounting 
for and safeguarding computer and other high-tech equipment in order to 
ensure appropriate use of City funds. 
 
To accomplish our objective we performed the following: 
 
Obtained the City’s equipment inventory report from Procurement’s web 
site. This report (the C400 database) lists all portable electronics, non-
portable electronics, non-electronics, furniture and appliances, and other 
equipment assigned to the various City departments. We sorted the 
database by category for each City department and extracted all items 
coded as portable electronics and other items.  We chose to test portable 
electronics and other items because we determined that these assets were 
the most susceptible to missappropriation.   
 
Selected a sample size of 381 equipment items (approximately 1 percent) 
covering 33 city departments to review in more detail. We selected our 
samples using a stratified random sampling method. The dollar value of the 
categories of equipment selected were partitioned by department and 
samples were then randomly selected based on the size of the department. 
 
After removing selected items associated with the FJD and three now-
defunct departments, we visited each of the 29 remaining City 
departments to observe the equipment selected in our sample. We 
interviewed department personnel to determine their  policies and 
procedures for managing equipment inventory.  
 
We also sorted each department’s portable electronics and other items 
equipment inventory to determine the number  and dollar value of items 
that have been marked “Can Not Locate” (CNL).   
 
We performed our work from June 2016 through December 2016 in 
accordance with Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards 
(GAGAS) issued by the Comptroller General of the United States. Those 
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, 
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and 
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence 
obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions 
based on our audit objectives. 
 
 
 

=== página 25 ===
AGENCY RESPONSE 
 
21 | P a g e 
 

=== página 26 ===
AGENCY RESPONSE 
 
22 | P a g e 
 
 

=== página 27 ===
AGENCY RESPONSE 
 
23 | P a g e 
 
 
 

=== página 28 ===
AGENCY RESPONSE 
 
24 | P a g e 
 
 
 

=== página 29 ===
CONTROLLER’S OFFICE CONTACT INFORMATION 
 
25 | P a g e 
 
 
Bill Rubin, First Deputy City Controller, (215) 686-6696, bill.rubin@phila.gov 
 
 
 
The City Controller’s Office is the independent watchdog agency of the City of 
Philadelphia that strives to promote honest, efficient, effective, and fully 
accountable city government.  We address this mission by: providing timely and 
objective analysis on the availability of funds for all City contracts; preventing 
inappropriate spending of public funds; and providing objective, timely, and 
relevant information to City officials, the public, and other interested parties 
about financial operations of the City, and on ways to improve City operations 
and the use of public resources. 
 
 
The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of the City Controller's 
Office 
reports 
is 
through 
the 
City 
Controller's 
Web 
site 
at 
(www.philadelphiacontroller.org).  
 
 
Contact information 
Web site: 
http://www.philadelphiacontroller.org/report-fraud 
Telephone: 
(215) 686-3804 (automated line) 
 
Download the FREE Fraud Reporting app for iOS and Android devices. 
 
City Controller’s 
Office Contact 
City Controller’s 
Office Mission 
Statement 
Obtaining Copies of 
City Controller’s 
Office Reports 
To Report Fraud, 
Waste, and 
Mismanagement of 
Your City Tax 
Dollars 
