=== p1 ===
Policy Research Working Paper
11125
From Chalkboards to Chatbots
Evaluating the Impact of Generative AI on Learning 
Outcomes in Nigeria
Martín De Simone
Federico Tiberti
Maria Barron Rodriguez
Federico Manolio
Wuraola Mosuro
Eliot Jolomi Dikoru
Education Global Department
May 2025 
A verified reproducibility package for this paper is 
available at http://reproducibility.worldbank.org, 
click here for direct access. 

=== p2 ===
Produced by the Research Support Team
Abstract
The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development 
issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the 
names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those 
of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and 
its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.
Policy Research Working Paper 11125
This study evaluates the impact of a program leveraging 
large language models for virtual tutoring in secondary 
education in Nigeria. Using a randomized controlled trial, 
the program deployed Microsoft Copilot (powered by 
GPT-4) to support first-year senior secondary students in 
English language learning over six weeks. The intervention 
demonstrated a significant improvement of 0.31 standard 
deviation on an assessment that included English topics 
aligned with the Nigerian curriculum, knowledge of artifi­
cial intelligence and digital skills. The effect on English, the 
main outcome of interest, was of 0.23 standard deviations. 
Cost-effectiveness analysis revealed substantial learning 
gains, equating to 1.5 to 2 years of ’business-as-usual’ 
schooling, situating the intervention among some of the 
most cost-effective programs to improve learning outcomes. 
An analysis of heterogeneous effects shows that while the 
program benefits students across the baseline ability dis­
tribution, the largest effects are for female students, and 
those with higher initial academic performance. The find­
ings highlight that artificial intelligence-powered tutoring, 
when designed and used properly, can have transformative 
impacts in the education sector in low-resource settings.
This paper is a product of the Education Global Department. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide 
open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research 
Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://www.worldbank.org/prwp. The authors may be contacted at 
desimone@worldbank.org, ftiberti@worldbank.org, mbarronrodriguez@worldbank.org, fmanolio@worldbank.org, 
wmosuro@worldbank.org, and edikoru@worldbank.org. A verified reproducibility package for this paper is available at 
http://reproducibility.worldbank.org, click here for direct access.    
 
 
P
O
L
I
C
Y
R
E
S
E
A
R
C
H
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W
O
R
K
I
N
G
 
P
A
P
E
R
S
TRANSPARENT
ANALYSIS

=== p3 ===
From Chalkboards to Chatbots: Evaluating the
Impact of Generative AI on Learning Outcomes in
Nigeria*
Mart´ın De Simone, Federico Tiberti, Maria Barron Rodriguez,
Federico Manolio, Wuraola Mosuro, Eliot Jolomi Dikoru.†
Keywords: large-language models, adaptive learning, artificial i ntelligence, educa-
tion technology, secondary education, teaching at the right level.
JEL Classification: C93, I21, J24, O15, O33.
*The team would like to thank Scherezad Latif and Halil Dundar, Education Practice Managers, World
Bank. The team extends its appreciation to Dr. Joan Osa Oviawe and Jennifer Aisuan, for their collaboration
throughout the implementation of the pilot, as well as Alex Twinomugisha, Robert Hawkins, and Crist´obal
Cobo for their support with the intervention. The team thanks those who provided comments to a previous
version of this paper, including David Evans, Halsey Rogers, Carolina Lopez, Francisco Haimovich, Daniel
Rodriguez-Segura, Noah Yarrow, Juan Bar´on, and Lucas Gortazar. The team acknowledges the financial
support received from the Mastercard Foundation.
†De Simone: The World Bank.
E-mail: mdesimone@worldbank.org.
Tiberti: The World Bank.
E-
mail: ftiberti@worldbank.org.
Barron: The World Bank.
E-mail: mbarronrodriguez@worldbank.org.
Manolio: The World Bank. E-mail: fmanolio@worldbank.org. Mosuro: The World Bank. E-mail: wmo-
suro@worldbank.org. Dikoru: The World Bank. E-mail: edikoru@worldbank.org.
Originally published in the Policy Research Working Paper Series in May 2025. This version is 
updated in December 2025. 
To obtain the originally published version, please email prwp@worldbank.org.

=== p4 ===
1
Introduction
The global education sector is grappling with a learning crisis. According to the Learning
Poverty Index, approximately 70% of 10-year-olds in low- and middle-income countries
cannot read and understand an age-appropriate text (World Bank, 2022). These deficits
in learning accumulate and become particularly acute at the secondary school level, as
evidenced by numerous international, regional, and national assessments.
In his seminal 1984 study, Bloom demonstrated that students receiving one-on-one tu-
toring outperformed their peers in traditional classroom settings by an average of two
standard deviations (Bloom, 1984). Subsequent studies have consistently confirmed the
significant benefits of one-on-one tutoring (Nickow et al., 2020). The challenge, however,
is that implementing one-on-one tutoring at scale is costly and unaffordable for most ed-
ucation systems. Bloom referred to this challenge as the “two-sigma problem”: how to
replicate the gains of personalized tutoring at scale in a cost-effective manner.
This paper examines whether generative artificial intelligence, specifically large language
models (LLMs), can help solve that problem. We evaluate a six-week after-school tutoring
program in Nigeria that used a publicly available LLM (ChatGPT-4) to support students
in learning English. First-year secondary students from nine public schools in Benin City
were invited to participate; from this pool, 52% of eligible students expressed interest,
and participants were randomly selected from among them. Those assigned to the inter-
vention attended twelve 90-minute sessions in computer labs, engaging in curriculum-
aligned activities guided by teachers. We use a randomized controlled trial (RCT) design
to estimate the causal impact of the program on learning outcomes.
We present three main sets of results. First, we show that students selected to participate
in the program score 0.31 standard deviation higher in the final assessment that was deliv-
ered at the end of the intervention. We find strong statistically-significant intent-to-treat
(ITT) effects on all sections of that assessment: English skills (which included the majority
of questions, 0.24 σ), digital skills (0.14 σ), AI skills (0.31 σ) and an Item Response Theory
(IRT) composite score of each student’s exam (0.26 σ). We also show that the intervention
yielded strong positive results on the regular English curricular exam of the third term.
This result is important because the content evaluated in that exam was broader than the
one covered during the six weeks of the intervention and included the content of the en-
tire year. We calculate an ITT effect of being selected for the program on the performance
in the third-term exam of 0.21 standard deviations.
Second, we examine heterogeneity of the effects by certain pre-treatment characteristics.
2

=== p5 ===
Treatment effects were positive and statistically significant across all levels of baseline per-
formance, but stronger among students with better prior performance. Similarly, treat-
ment effects were positive and statistically significant over the entire distribution of a
proxy for socioeconomic status, but stronger among students with a higher one. Lastly,
treatment effects were stronger among female students, compensating for a deficit in their
baseline performance.
Third, we conduct dose-response analysis. We estimate Local Average Treatment Effect
(LATE) estimates, focusing on the impact of actual attendance to the intervention sessions,
which averaged 72% among the treatment group. Using attendance data, we estimate a
dose-response relationship, finding a strong linear association between days attended
and improved learning outcomes, with an effect size of approximately 0.031 standard
deviation per additional day of attendance. Further analysis predicts substantial gains
with extended program duration, estimating an increase of between 1.2 and 2.2 standard
deviations for a full academic year of participation, depending on attendance rates.
The findings, combined with a cost analysis, seem to indicate that the program was highly
cost-effective. The six-week pilot generated learning gains that take between 1.5 and
2 years in a business-as-usual scenario. The program achieved 3.2 equivalent years of
schooling (EYOS) per $100 invested, surpassing many comparable interventions. Using
Learning-adjusted years of schooling (LAYS) as the metric for the analysis, the program
generates up to 0.9 year of high-performance education. When benchmarked against
evidence from both low- and middle-income countries, the pilot program ranks among
the most cost-effective solutions for addressing learning crises.
Our study contributes to different strands of the literature that aim to identify the ef-
fect of programs that try to customize instruction to the level of students, both with and
without technology. Efforts to address this challenge have included the development of
the ”Teaching at the Right Level” (TaRL) approach, which has shown to improve learning
outcomes in contexts such as India, Kenya, Ghana, and Zambia (Banerjee et al., 2016). Im-
plementation modalities of TaRL have varied, ranging from pulling students out of class
(Banerjee et al., 2007), tracking classrooms (Duflo et al., 2011), providing extra instruc-
tional time outside of school (Banerjee et al., 2016), and employing volunteers instead of
teachers (Banerjee et al., 2008). However, scaling TaRL programs remains difficult due to
their labor-intensive nature. This challenge is particularly pronounced given the global
shortage of teachers, which is particularly pronounced in Sub-Saharan Africa. Recent
estimates suggest that by 2040, countries in the region will need 21% more secondary
school teachers per year (Evans and Mendez Acosta, forthcoming). Teacher shortages are
3

=== p6 ===
further compounded by high attrition rates, and the need for specialized knowledge at
the secondary level makes TaRL programs even more difficult to implement.
In recent years, adaptive learning software has emerged as a potential solution to the scal-
ability of tutoring programs by using technology to mimic one-on-one tutoring. Evidence
suggests that computer-adaptive learning systems can improve learning outcomes. For
example, a study of personalized, technology-aided after-school instruction for middle
school students in India reported gains of 0.37 standard deviation in math and 0.23 stan-
dard deviation in Hindi over a 4.5-month period (Muralidharan et al., 2019). A study in
Cambodia that focused on math instruction for primary school students found impacts
on cognitive skills due to students’ increased learning productivity per hour (Ito et al.,
2021). In El Salvador, the use of software for adaptive learning proved effective in an en-
vironment with heterogeneous classes and poorly qualified teachers (B¨uchel et al., 2022).
Experiments in China have also found positive effects on standardized math scores (Lai
et al., 2015a) and on Mandarin (Lai et al., 2015b), including when implemented during
regular school hours (Mo et al., 2014). In Ecuador, the possibility to use an adaptive-
learning software for 4 months led to large positive impact on standardized test scores
in math (Angel-Urdinola et al., 2023). Other studies that do not follow experimental ap-
proaches have also estimated positive effects of similar software programs, such as a pro-
gram in Uruguay that showed gains of 0.2 standard deviation on mathematics test scores
(Perera and Aboal, 2019).
Despite these successes, adaptive learning programs face several challenges. First, most
are not deployed in the world’s most challenging educational contexts, particularly in
Sub-Saharan Africa, raising questions about external validity. Second, these programs
often rely on proprietary software, which typically involves both fixed and per-student
costs, making them difficult to scale in resource-constrained environments.
Some adaptive-learning options are developed using artificial intelligence (AI) to adjust
to the level of the students, but they primarily rely on pattern recognition and predictive
algorithms, to provide students with exercises adjusted to their level based on a pool
of thousands of items. The recent advances in generative artificial intelligence offer a
promising avenue to use software to teach students while maintaining a more human-
like interaction with students through the use of natural language.
Most of the studies that have examined generative AI in education have been conducted
in developed countries and lab settings, assessing the short-term effects of brief interac-
tions (Kumar et al., 2023). In Italy, studies have found positive effects of Large Language
Models (LLMs) on learning outcomes through homework support (Vanzo et al., 2024). In
4

=== p7 ===
the United States, a human-AI approach with expert guidance through language mod-
els supports tutors instead of providing direct help to students, and found that students
working on mathematics with tutors randomly assigned to have access to a tutor co-pilot
are 4 percentage points more likely to master topics (Wang et al., 2024). A study carried
out among undergraduate students at Harvard University showed that those who ben-
efited from an AI-powered tutor at home performed better than those exposed only to
active learning classes (Kestin et al., 2024).
Only a few studies evaluate the effect of generative AI to support students through tutor-
ing. In Ghana, students who were given access to a phone for one hour a week and were
allowed to use an AI-powered math tutor via a messaging app to independently study
math improved their scores much more than those without access, with an effect size of
0.36 (Henkel et al., 2024). A recent study in T¨urkiye of an intervention that included only
four sessions showed that while LLMs can improve mathematics learning outcomes, they
can also be detrimental to learning in the long term if they are used as ”crutches” rather
than as tutors (Bastani et al., 2024). A similar effect was found for coding classes in a lab
setting (Lehmann et al., 2024). This study showed more positive impacts with the LLM
used with prompts to safeguard learning (Bastani et al., 2024).
Thus, this paper contributes to this recent literature by examining the impact of one of the
first programs to leverage LLMs for educational purposes in a developing country con-
text using a real experimental design in Sub-Saharan Africa. It also aims to address some
of the challenges identified in recent reviews of emerging studies on the effect of LLMs
on learning: the lack of objective measures to complement subjective assessments of im-
pact, weaknesses in the definition of the control and treatment groups (Weidlich et al.,
2025), and the lack of power analysis to determine adequate sample sizes (Deng et al.,
2024). Furthermore, the intervention used a free, off-the-shelf model, requiring minimal
customization and no pre-built question banks, which might facilitate its scalability.
The findings of this intervention underscore several critical policy implications for ad-
dressing the learning crisis in developing countries, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa.
The program demonstrated significant impacts on learning outcomes, even amid chal-
lenges such as internet disruptions and power outages, highlighting its potential in con-
texts with severe teacher shortages and resource constraints. AI-powered tutoring pro-
grams using LLMs can complement traditional teaching by enhancing teacher produc-
tivity and delivering personalized learning experiences, particularly when paired with
guided prompts, teacher oversight, and alignment with the curriculum. The interven-
tion’s cost-effectiveness and scalability are promising, leveraging local staff and free tools
5

=== p8 ===
to minimize costs while eliminating the need for extensive question banks required by
traditional adaptive software. However, policymakers must address potential inequities
arising from disparities in digital literacy and access to technology. Investments in infras-
tructure, teacher training, and inclusive digital education are essential to ensure equitable
access and mitigate the risk of exacerbating inequalities. Given the nascent application of
LLMs in education, numerous questions remain unanswered, underscoring the impor-
tance of replicating this study, including with small variations.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the intervention and
the experimental design, including the data used. Section 3 presents our main results,
including a heterogeneity and dosage analysis, as well as a robustness analysis. Section
4 discusses cost effectiveness, proposes future research directions, and presents policy
implications.
2
Intervention and Study Design
2.1
The Intervention
The study analyzes the effects of an after-school program in which students interacted
with a large language model twice per week to improve their English skills, following
the national curriculum. The intervention was implemented in Benin City, Nigeria, us-
ing Copilot, an LLM powered by the GPT-4 model at the time of implementation.1 The
program was implemented over a six-week period between June and July 2024, targeting
first-year senior secondary school students, who are typically 15 years old.2 The interven-
tion aimed to improve learning outcomes in English language classes using an AI chatbot
as a virtual tutor. The selected tool was Microsoft Copilot, powered by ChatGPT-4, which
was freely available and required only student registration. The program was conducted
in nine schools and the students were grouped according to the number of computers in
each school lab, with an average of 30 students per session. Each student was allowed to
participate in a maximum of two 1.5-hour after-school sessions per week.
The selection of schools was based on the availability of computer labs. These labs varied
in the types of devices they used, ranging from laptops to desktop computers. Internet
access, essential for real-time interaction with the LLM, was provided through routers
1GPT-4 exhibits human-level performance on various professional and academic benchmarks, including
passing a simulated bar exam with a score around the top 10 percent of test takers (Achiam et al., 2023).
2A detailed implementation timeline can be found in Table 14.
6

=== p9 ===
and mobile telephone signals. However, internet disruptions and power outages were
common challenges faced during the intervention. Despite these issues, students were
able to interact with the chatbot for the majority of the sessions.
All students’ guardians signed consent forms, agreeing to their children’s participation
in the pilot program. Students worked in pairs, sharing a computer, and engaged in
dialogue with the AI tool to enhance their learning. Teachers, who played a critical role
in guiding the students but did not provide direct instruction, participated in a single
three-day training program with one cohort. This training introduced teachers to the
functionalities of the LLM and equipped them with pedagogical techniques to ensure
their responsible use and supervise students during the sessions. It also made them aware
of potential risks, such as hallucinations and biases, that the LLM could have.
In the first session, teachers familiarized students with Microsoft Copilot, emphasizing
both its educational benefits and potential risks, such as over-reliance on the model and
the possibility of hallucinations and biased outputs. The goal was to foster responsible us-
age, encouraging students to complement their learning with the AI tool while retaining
critical thinking skills.
Each subsequent session focused on a topic from the first-year English language curricu-
lum, aligned with the material that students covered during their regular classes. The
sessions began with a teacher-provided prompt, followed by free interaction between the
student pairs and the AI tool. Teachers circulated the classroom, ensuring students’ in-
teractions remained relevant and on task. Each teacher was provided with a three-part
implementation toolkit which included: a) curated online learning resources on the use of
Copilot and LLMs; b) a handbook focused on AI literacy and potential risks and benefits;
and c) session guidelines, including suggested initial prompts and potential follow-up
questions to assist students if needed. Teachers were also provided with contacts in case
they faced any problems with the program implementation, and a group-chat was cre-
ated to streamline communications. The students also had a customized guide, which
included the initial prompts.
The lesson guides and their prompts were carefully crafted to position the LLM as a tu-
tor, focusing on facilitating learning rather than simply providing direct answers. These
prompts were informed by principles from the science of learning and were tailored to
the cultural context of southern Nigeria, incorporating familiar names and customs to
resonate with students.3 Some of the prompt structures were derived from Mollick and
3One of the strategies employed to enhance learning through prompting was to encourage the LLM to
leverage ”desirable difficulties” rather than simply providing direct answers. These are conditions that,
7

=== p10 ===
Mollick (2023a). This design aimed to encourage the LLM to adapt to each student’s
individual learning level, providing pedagogical support through contextually relevant
examples and diverse teaching techniques. Students interacted with the LLM by asking
questions, completing exercises, and receiving personalized feedback. At the end of each
session, the students were encouraged to reflect and discuss lessons learned and chal-
lenges encountered during session to facilitate knowledge sharing among the group.
To ensure the fidelity of program implementation, monitors were first trained, provided
with monitoring guidelines, and then assigned to track student attendance and gather
information about each session using Kobo Toolbox.4 This system allowed for real-time
data collection, ensuring that the intervention was carried out as intended in each school
and offered the opportunity to respond promptly to any challenges.5
2.2
Sample and Randomization
The randomization for the pilot program was conducted at the student level in the nine
selected schools. All first-year senior secondary school students in these schools were
informed about the program through information sessions and given a window of ten
days to express their interest in participating. Only students who voluntarily expressed
interest within this period were included in the randomization pool.
To assess whether students who expressed interest in the after-school program differed
systematically from those who did not, we compare pre-program exam scores between
students who were eligible for the lottery (i.e., those who later expressed interest) and
those who were not. Table 12 reports estimates from regressions of baseline academic
outcomes on eligibility status. In the first term, students who would later express interest
scored 0.085 standard deviations higher than their peers (p ¡ 0.1) (see Figure 6). However,
by the second term—still prior to the lottery—this relationship reverses: students who
while seemingly challenging, foster more durable and flexible learning (Bjork, 1994). For example, the
initial and suggested prompts incorporated evidence-based principles such as retrieval practice—shown to
be effective for upper secondary students when implemented through multiple-choice and short-answer
quizzes (McDermott et al., 2014)—elaborative interrogation (Dunlosky et al., 2013), and the use of concrete
examples (Weinstein et al., 2018). However, we believe there is significant potential for future iterations
of the intervention to more fully exploit evidence-based strategies for improving learning outcomes. For
instance, while in our program, each session was dedicated to a single curriculum topic, future programs
could experiment with variations, such as incorporating interleaving (Weinstein et al., 2018) and spacing
practices (Kang, 2016). These approaches would allow for the coverage of multiple topics within a single
session, revisiting and reinforcing them over time to enhance long-term retention and understanding.
4For details on this tool, see Das (2024).
5The monitoring data included teacher and student attendance, punctuality, power and internet condi-
tions, as well as participants’ engagement, among other factors
8

=== p11 ===
did not express interest scored 0.147 standard deviations higher (p ¡ 0.01) (see Figure 7).
The absence of a consistent directional pattern across terms suggests that selection into
the program was not strongly or systematically correlated with academic performance.
While our analysis focuses on treatment effects among those who expressed interest, the
lack of clear academic selection implies that results may generalize beyond this group.
Nevertheless, we lack demographic data on non-interested students, which limits our
ability to assess representativeness along other dimensions.
Once the period to express interest closed, the randomization was carried out using sim-
ple random sampling without replacement6 among interested students to assign them
either to the treatment group, which participated in the program, or to the control group,
which did not receive any intervention but continued their regular learning in the class-
room. The students completed a baseline survey and an end-line survey with sociodemo-
graphic information. Initially, 657 students were assigned to the treatment group and 671
to the control group. However, only 422 students in the treatment group and 337 in the
control group completed the final assessment, which constitutes the final sample used for
the analysis.
Table 1 provides summary statistics and balance tests for key observable characteristics of
the two groups. Demographic variables include gender, age, and a socio-economic status
(SES) index. This index was derived from a principal components analysis of household
characteristics, such as access to goods (computers, phones), services (internet connec-
tion), study spaces, and parental education.7 The SES index, as well as other variables
such as the proportion of female students and age, shows that the sample is balanced
across the treatment and control groups, with differences that are small and not statisti-
cally significant. These results confirm that the randomization process achieved balance
in key characteristics, supporting the validity of subsequent comparisons between the
treatment and control groups.
In addition to sociodemographic information, baseline academic performance was mea-
sured using scores from the First and Second Term Exams conducted prior to the inter-
vention. The difference between treatment and control group students in mean baseline
scores for the First Term Exam is 0.131 (SE = 0.073), and for the Second Term Exam, it
6Randomization was conducted without stratification using a computerized system. Although the ran-
domization process did not incorporate a fixed random seed, the allocation results were documented and
saved, ensuring the assignments are reproducible and transparent, as recommended by Bruhn and McKen-
zie (2009).
7For a discussion on using principal component analysis to build a SES index, see Vyas and Ku-
maranayake (2006).
9

=== p12 ===
is 0.096 (SE = 0.073). These differences are also statistically insignificant, indicating that
students in both groups had comparable academic performance before the program.
2.3
Learning Data used as the Dependent Variable
At the end of the six-week intervention, participating and non-participating students
completed a standardized assessment designed to measure three key outcomes: (a) En-
glish language proficiency aligned with the Nigerian curriculum for the corresponding
period (our main outcome of interest), (b) knowledge of AI, and (c) understanding of
basic digital concepts (from now on referred as ”digital skills” for convenience). The ma-
jority of the questions aimed to assess English language. To minimize the risk of cheating,
multiple versions of the assessment were created, each with a randomized order of ques-
tions. Additionally, monitors were stationed at the schools to oversee the administration
of the assessments and ensure compliance with testing protocols. The assessment was
administered in a traditional pencil-and-paper format and consisted of multiple-choice
questions designed by experts based on the Nigerian curriculum.
For each student, a simple score was generated based on the percentage of correct an-
swers across all topics, as well as separate scores for each of the three domains (English
language, AI knowledge, and digital skills). In addition to these unweighted scores,
weighted scores were calculated for each domain and for the overall assessment. The
weights were based on the ex-ante difficulty of each test item, which was determined by
the test designers prior to the administration.
An additional score for proficiency in each theme was calculated using Item Response
Theory (IRT).8 This method allowed for comparability across students by placing their
performance on a common scale, taking into account the actual difficulty of each question
as observed in the sample. The IRT-derived score provided a more nuanced measurement
of English language ability -as well as knowledge of AI and digital skills- by considering
both the students’ responses and the varying difficulty levels of the assessment items.
In addition to the intervention-specific assessment, an additional dependent variable was
derived from the student’s final English exam scores. This exam, which was conducted
independently by the school, covered the entire term’s content, which extended beyond
the six-week period of the after-school program.
8For a more detailed explanation of IRT models, see Van der Linden and Hambleton (2015). For a dis-
cussion on the importance of using IRT in education RCTs, see Muralidharan (2017).
10

=== p13 ===
3
Results
3.1
Model and Main Results
We estimate the intent-to-treat (ITT) effects of the intervention using the following regres-
sion:
Yiks = α + γs · Baselineik + βs · Treatmenti + ϕk + ϵiks
(1)
The dependent variable Yiks represents student i’s test score in school k and subject s. The
specification includes a coefficient γs for the student’s pre-treatment exam score from the
second term (Baselineik), and a term βs for our primary variable of interest—an indicator
for whether the student won the treatment lottery. To account for unobserved school-level
heterogeneity, we include school fixed effects (ϕk).
Although the difference in academic performance before the intervention between the
treatment and the control group was not statistically significant, it was still positive in
favor of the treatment group. Therefore, we followed a conservative approach to ensure
the robustness of our results, including the performance in the second term exam as a
control variable. This approach is also recommended by Muralidharan (2017).
Table 2 reports the intent-to-treat (ITT) effects of the intervention on three main outcomes:
the total score of the final assessment (weighted and IRT scaled) and the score from the
third term exam. The coefficient for the second-term exam is significant across all models,
reflecting the predictive validity of prior performance. School-fixed effects are included
in all models, and the number of observations ranges between 636 and 654, depending
on the outcome.
The treatment effect on the total score (weighted) is 0.31 standard deviation (SE = 0.068),
and the effect remains positive and significant at 0.263 standard deviation (SE = 0.068)
when scaled using Item Response Theory (IRT). These results indicate that the interven-
tion led to substantial improvements in students’ performance on the assessment directly
tied to the program. Importantly, treatment also had a positive and significant impact on
the third term exam score, with an effect size of 0.206 standard deviation (SE = 0.067),
although this exam was not limited to the intervention’s specific content. This suggests
that the intervention may have fostered generalizable skills or improved learning out-
comes beyond the targeted content.
11

=== p14 ===
Table 3 provides a more granular analysis by disaggregating the total score into English
skills, digital skills, and AI skills. The results reveal that the intervention had the largest
effect on AI knowledge, with a coefficient of 0.309 standard deviations (SE = 0.077), fol-
lowed by English skills (0.238 σ, SE = 0.068) and digital skills (0.139 σ, SE = 0.076). Effects
on English skills (our main outcome of interest) and on AI skills are statistically signif-
icant at the 1% level. The effects on digital skills are statistically significant at the 10 %
level. The positive and significant effects on AI and digital skills further indicate potential
spillovers to other skill areas, even though these were not the primary targets of the pro-
gram. As with Table 2, the second term exam scores are strong predictors of outcomes,
and school fixed effects are included to account for unobserved factors at the school level.
The results of this pilot study are particularly notable given that several factors likely at-
tenuated the estimated treatment effects. First, the randomization was conducted at the
student level rather than at the school level, a design feature that may have led to spillover
effects, as students in the control group may have interacted with peers in the treatment
group during regular school hours, potentially diffusing the impact of the intervention.
Second, monitoring and evaluation data indicate that some control group students inad-
vertently gained access to the after-school sessions, due to the lack of willingness of some
teachers to enforce the distinction, especially during the first weeks. Additionally, sig-
nificant implementation challenges occurred during the first weeks of the program, with
many students encountering difficulties creating accounts and engaging with the LLM.
Despite these challenges, the intervention yielded positive and significant results, sug-
gesting that the observed effects should be interpreted as conservative estimates of the
intervention’s impact.
A recent review of randomized controlled trials in pre-primary, primary, and secondary
education in low and middle-income countries found a median effect of 0.10 standard
deviations in overall test scores and 0.14 in reading (Evans and Yuan, 2022). Thus, the
results found in this study are situated at least at the 80th percentile of all RCTs, even
though effect sizes in secondary education tend to be lower than in primary. Even when
considering only RCTs that had between 500 and 1000 participants, the results are still
higher than 80% of the other studies. When considering only the effects on language
outcomes, the results are near the 70th percentile of all studies.
12

=== p15 ===
3.2
Heterogeneity
As a first step, we conducted quantile regressions to examine the treatment effect at dif-
ferent points in the outcome distribution. The analysis indicates that the treatment has a
positive and statistically significant effect across all quantiles, suggesting broad benefits
for students regardless of their initial performance levels. Table 4 examines the hetero-
geneity in treatment effects by gender, SES, and baseline academic performance. Column
(1) explores heterogeneity by gender, using an interaction term between the treatment
indicator and a female dummy variable. While the main effect of treatment is not statisti-
cally significant for this specification, the interaction term for treatment and being female
is positive and significant (0.420) at the 5% level, indicating that the intervention had a
larger positive effect on female students compared to their male counterparts. This result
should be interpreted with caution, as it appears to be influenced by the inclusion of a
girls-only school that performed worse than others in the sample prior to the interven-
tion.
Column (2) considers heterogeneity by baseline academic performance, as measured by
the second-term exam score. The interaction term between treatment and the second-term
exam score is positive and significant at the 5% level, indicating that students with higher
prior academic performance benefited more from the intervention. Column (3) examines
heterogeneity by socio-economic status, using an interaction term between treatment and
the SES index. The interaction term is positive (0.113) and significant, also at the 5%
level, suggesting that students from higher SES backgrounds experienced larger treat-
ment effects. This finding aligns with anecdotal evidence indicating that, for students
from poorer households, this was often one of their first experiences using computers.
While these students still experienced significant gains relative to the counterfactual of
not participating, the initial unfamiliarity with technology may have moderated the mag-
nitude of the intervention’s impact.
3.3
Dosage Effects
All the results presented thus far are ITT estimates, which are based on an average at-
tendance rate of approximately 72% among participants in the treatment group. In this
section, we present LATE and OLS estimates, which measure the impact of actually at-
tending the sessions. These estimates leverage attendance data collected as part of the
program’s monitoring and evaluation efforts (see Figure 5). Additionally, under further
assumptions, we provide predicted treatment effects at varying levels of program expo-
13

=== p16 ===
sure. We estimate the dose-response relationship between days of attendance and value-
added using the following model:
Yiks = α + γik · Baselineik + µ · Attendanceik + ϵiks
(2)
The dependent variable Yis represents student i’s test score in subject s in school k. The
specification includes a coefficient γik for the student’s second-term pre-treatment exam
score (Baselineik), and a term µ for our primary variable of interest—the number of days
the student attended intervention sessions, which takes a value of zero for the control
group (Attendanceik).
Table 5 shows that higher attendance is strongly associated with improved learning out-
comes, providing evidence of a dose-response effect, with an estimated effect size of ap-
proximately d=0.033 for each additional day of attendance. This finding underscores
the importance of consistent participation, as greater exposure to the program results in
meaningful improvements in student outcomes.
These estimates capture the average causal response (ACR) of the treatment, which rep-
resents a weighted average of the causal effects of a one-unit change in treatment (in this
case, an additional day of attendance) for individuals whose treatment status is influ-
enced by the instrument (Angrist and Imbens, 1995). However, using these Instrumental
Variable (IV) estimates to predict the effects of different levels of attendance requires ad-
ditional assumptions, as stated in Muralidharan et al. (2019): (i) assumptions about how
treatment effects vary across students, as the ACR is identified only for a subset of com-
pliers (those who attend at least one session) and not the entire sample, and (ii) assump-
tions about the functional form of the relationship between days attended and treatment
effects, since the ACR reflects an average across varying levels of treatment intensity.
For the first assumption, we cannot assume that the effect on the non-compliers would
have been the same as the compliers. This is because we have evidence showing that
low performing students tend to benefit less from the program (Table 4), and that better
performance in previous examinations correlates positively with attendance (Table 9).
Therefore, we follow a conservative approach and assume that the non-compliers -those
who are assigned to the treatment group but do not attend any sessions- would not benefit
at all had they attended the program. Under that assumption, and given that the non-
compliers represent only 3.5% of those assigned to the treatment group, the estimated
effect size of each additional day of attendance is of 0.031.
We follow this conservative approach despite the fact that, following Muralidharan et al.
14

=== p17 ===
(2019), two other pieces of evidence would be consistent with expecting the ACR to ap-
ply even to the non-compliers. First, we cannot reject the equality of the IV estimates
of equation (3) and the ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates using a value-added (VA)
specification, which suggests that the average treatment effects and local average treat-
ment effects (ATE and LATE) may be similar. Second, the constant term in the OLS VA
specifications (corresponding to 0 attendance) is similar when estimated using the full
sample and when estimated using only the data in the treatment group. This suggests
equality of potential outcomes across students with different compliance rates.
Regarding the functional form of the relationship between days attended and the treat-
ment effect, a graphic representation suggests a linear relationship (Figure 4). Moreover,
while the value added of the scores is strongly correlated with the number of days at-
tended in a linear specification, adding a quadratic term does not improve the fit, and the
quadratic term is not significant, as shown on Table 7. From a more theoretical point of
view, the linear effect is also expected given the adaptive nature of LLMs. Thus, it seems
fair to assume that, while effect is not the same across students, the effect for each student
does not show diminishing returns to program exposure.
Qualitative evidence from the intervention aligns with these results, suggesting that the
first days of the program had little to no measurable impact on learning outcomes. This
lag may reflect the time required for students to familiarize themselves with the technol-
ogy and adjust to the new instructional format. Beyond this initial acclimation period, the
effects of additional days of attendance remained consistently positive, with no evidence
of plateauing. This suggests that extending the implementation period beyond the six
weeks of the intervention could have further amplified learning gains. It also suggests
that the LATE estimates might be underestimated, given the null effects of the first few
days of participation.
Under the assumptions of constant treatment effects diminished by the lack of effect on
non-compliers and a linear dose-response relationship—both of which appear reason-
able in this context— and following the methodology used in (Muralidharan et al., 2019),
our instrumental variables analysis predicts that attending the program for 36 weeks (the
equivalent of a school year) would lead to gains of approximately 2.23 standard devia-
tions. A more conservative estimate based on an attendance rate of 72% -the empirical
value in our sample-, predicts that attending the program for 21 weeks (over a theoretical
total of 36) would lead to gains in the range of 1.55 standard deviations. Under a more
pessimistic scenario of only 50% attendance rates, the estimate would still be 1.2 standard
deviations. These findings highlight the potential of sustained implementation to yield
15

=== p18 ===
transformative impacts on learning outcomes.
3.4
Robustness
To test the robustness of the results, we performed several checks, progressively adjust-
ing the baseline model to improve robustness and account for potential sources of bias.
First, for all the models presented, we employed robust standard errors to address het-
eroskedasticity in the data. Second, we included school-fixed effects in all the models
presented, with robust standard errors, to control for unobservable school-level charac-
teristics that might influence student outcomes. Third, we incorporated students’ perfor-
mance in the second-term exam, conducted prior to the intervention, as a control variable.
Although the difference in performance between the treatment and control groups was
not statistically significant, the treatment students exhibited slightly higher scores. As
mentioned above, adding this variable allows us to adopt a conservative approach, miti-
gating the risk of any potential, albeit unlikely, selection bias. The models with all these
specifications are the basis for our main results, presented in Table 2.
Furthermore, we estimated the models using alternative specifications of the dependent
variable to assess the robustness of our findings. For each outcome of interest, total score,
English language proficiency, digital skills, and AI knowledge, we analyzed specifica-
tions with and without the experts’ weighted difficulty of questions. Additionally, we
employed IRT as an alternative approach to scoring the assessments. This approach en-
sures that the estimated outcomes are not unduly influenced by the design or composition
of the test. We presented the main results for the total score weighted (Column (1) of Ta-
ble 2), which are 0.31 standard deviation, and the IRT scaled results (Column (2) of Table
2), of 0.263 standard deviation.
Table 8 presents a sensitivity analysis to test the robustness of the treatment effects by
iteratively excluding one school at a time from the sample. The dependent variable shown
is the total score (weighted) from the final learning assessment, but similar results are
found with other specifications. The estimated treatment effects range from 0.156 (SE
= 0.085) when excluding Idia College to 0.360 (SE = 0.072) when excluding Imaguero
College. While the effect remains statistically significant at the 1% level in most cases, the
exclusion of Idia College reduces the effect size and significance to the 10% level. This
is, however, understandable, given the large size of Idia College (219 of 657, or 33% of
the sample), whose exclusion reduces the power of the calculation. For all other schools,
the estimated coefficients are stable around 0.30 and maintaining statistical significance at
16

=== p19 ===
the 1% level. Overall, the results demonstrate that the treatment effects remain consistent
and statistically significant across most specifications, indicating that the findings are not
driven by the influence of any single school.
Finally, since the difference in attrition between the treatment and control groups is sig-
nificant, we first provide Lee-bounds estimates of ITT effects on the outcome variables.
These bounds indicate the range of the ITT effects estimated using Lee (2005) bounding
approach. This method accounts for possible bias due to attrition or selection into the pro-
gram. The analysis shows that the treatment effects are always positive and significant,
even following this conservative approach (Table 10). In addition, we assess the robust-
ness of our findings to attrition by modeling the likelihood of participation in the endline
based on observed characteristics. We then calculate inverse probability weighted treat-
ment effects, finding that the estimated ITT effects remain largely unchanged (Table 11).
Thus, our main conclusions hold even in the presence of non-random attrition at endline.
4
Discussion
4.1
Cost-Effectiveness
This section provides a cost-effectiveness analysis of the pilot, drawing comparisons with
other high-dosage programs, and discusses some challenges and opportunities for scala-
bility. We measure the program’s nominal cost using planning and budget data, and esti-
mate its implicit costs on pro rata basis (Valdivia Teixeira, 2019). Implementing the 6-week
pilot for 657 students, had a per-pupil cost of approximately $48, and the marginal cost is
estimated at $9. Furthermore, extending the pilot over the four academic quarters would
cost $124 per pupil, which can be particularly useful to frame policy discussions about
the return on investment of a longer intervention even without further improvement in
learning outcomes (a conservative approach considering our dosage effects results). Ta-
ble 13 provides a breakdown of the pilot’s costs and our estimation for a four-quarter
program. As the pilot was implemented, fixed costs accounted for 43% of overall costs
(39% in a hypothetical four-quarter program), which provides an idea of the potential
cost reduction in a second round of the program.9
To analyze the effectiveness of the pilot, we follow the methodology used in Evans and
9This is particularly relevant considering that content development accounted for 72% of all fixed costs,
and would be 80% for yearly implementation.
17

=== p20 ===
Yuan (2019). To estimate effectiveness, size effects are translated into EYOS, which ex-
presses the years of ’business-as-usual’ schooling in terms of learning outcomes deliv-
ered by a given intervention. Our ITT effect of 0.238 standard deviation in English10 is
equivalent to increasing 1.5 years of ’business-as-usual’ schooling in Nigeria, and the to-
tal score gain of 0.31 standard deviation is equivalent to 2 additional years of schooling in
the country. This is more than twice the effect of some of the most effective interventions
in education, such as structured pedagogy, which is typically implemented for the entire
school year. For the remainder of this section, we use effects on English given that this
is our main outcome of interest. The intervention’s cost-effectiveness, measured in EYOS
per $100 (theoretically) invested per participant, is estimated to yield 3.2 EYOS under the
assumption of constant returns.
We convert gains in test scores into increased wages (Evans and Yuan, 2019). We esti-
mate that improvements in English would result in an increase of 14% in wages.11 The
additional annual income ranges between $392 and $630.12 Over their work-life, each
participant has a present discounted value of income gains of $7,767 to $12,51713 When
considering the long-term wage effects and the cost of our pilot, the benefit-cost ratio of
our pilot program is 161 to 260. As a reference point, we calculate that running the pi-
lot for one year without further improvements in learning outcomes would still yield a
benefit-cost ratio as high as 62 to 100.
For comparison purposes, the return on investment of the program is very high com-
pared to recent evidence from high-dosage personalized tutoring programs with and
without technology in the United States. Guryan et al. (2023), Bhatt et al. (2024), Fryer
and Howard-Noveck (2020) yield benefit-cost ratios that range from 2.4 to 8. However,
evidence from low-income countries (LICs) and lower-middle-income countries (LMICs)
shows benefit-cost ratios that vary between 8 and 156 (Glewwe et al. (2010), Duflo et al.
(2011), Banerjee et al. (2007), Evans and Yuan (2019)). In line with our results, a recent
review of 150 interventions in global education (Angrist et al., 2023) found that programs
teaching at the right level with a technology component generate the largest benefit-cost
10This section focuses on English outcomes since most of the literature that uses EYOS and LAYS focuses
on language or math skills. If instead we used the overall scores, the estimates would be larger.
11Following Evans and Yuan (2019), since we do not have data on returns to learning in Nigeria, we
use that of Kenya, the country with the closest income per capita to Nigeria (($6,200 versus $6,020 in PPP,
current 2023).
12These values depend on what labor-share of income is applied. The World Penn Table estimates it at
0.465. (Feenstra et al., 2015), and the ILO estimation is 0.748. While we prefer the ILO methodology because
it adjusts for self-employed income, we provide both values.
13We use a 3% discount rate, assume our representative agent will enter the labor market at 20 years old,
and have a 40-work life. We also assume that wage returns to skills are constant across one’s working life.
18

=== p21 ===
ratios across LICs and LMICs, with a weighted average of 65.
Like in any other lower-middle income country, the productivity of a ’business as usual’
day in a Nigerian school is lower than in a high-performing country. To facilitate cross-
country comparisons, we calculate the LAYS (Angrist et al., 2025; Filmer et al., 2020),
which adjusts the learning gains in years of schooling of our program by the quality of
learning in Nigeria. Using the learning gain in English skills (0.24 σ), we estimate the
LAYS under two scenarios. If the effects last only one year, the intervention produces 0.3
LAYS. Conversely, if the impacts last for the remaining school life expectancy, the program
generates an additional 0.9 year of high-quality schooling for each participant.14 In other
words, our Nigerian participants gained (on average) up to 0.9 years of a top-performing
country education. Finally, our program yields between 0.6 and 1.9 LAYS per $100. If
instead of the estimates based on the 6-week program we used the estimates calculated
in the dosage effect section for English, the LAYS for one year of the program -accounting
for the observed attendance rate- would be 1.25.
Beyond comparing small quantitative differences, it is important to assess results as ordi-
nal rather than cardinal, given the varying underlying assumptions, imprecision in esti-
mations, and contextual conditions of each study. Through this lens, analysis can inform
broad trade-offs in policy making, budget allocation, and program design. Consequently,
the pilot program’s benefit-cost ratios and other cost-effectiveness metrics are situated at
the upper end or above benchmarks, highlighting its potential as a cost-effective solution
for addressing learning crises in low-resource settings.
4.2
Future Research Directions
Several potential avenues for future research emerge from the findings of this study.
First, extending the duration of the program beyond six weeks could provide insight into
whether a longer intervention leads to more substantial or sustained improvements in
learning outcomes and what the shape of the learning curve is as time progresses. A more
extended program might also allow for more complex interactions with the chatbot, fur-
ther enhancing its educational benefits. These extended studies should be complemented
with a more qualitative assessment of the interaction between the students and the AI
tool, in order to understand the causal mechanism driving the improvements in learning,
and the specific ways that students benefit from the virtual tutoring.
14Considering that our participants are in Senior Secondary 1, we use t = 3 as the remaining expected
years in school.
19

=== p22 ===
Second, expanding the study to include a more diverse set of schools, particularly those in
rural areas, would improve the external validity of the findings. By investigating the ef-
fectiveness of the program in various educational settings, it could be possible to assess its
scalability and adaptability to different contexts. Both a longer duration of the interven-
tion and a broader set of schools could show insights into what Rodriguez-Segura (2022)
calls ”general equilibrium” effects after the roll-out of educational technology interven-
tions, which could include potential changes in teacher attitudes, effort, and behavior,
even as part of the regular instruction.
Another promising avenue for exploration is the addition of an additional treatment arm
that offers one-on-one tutoring by teachers without the use of technology. This would
allow for a direct comparison between the effectiveness of LLM-powered tutoring and
traditional teacher-led tutoring, providing valuable insights into cost-effectiveness and
pedagogical efficacy, and helping to calculate the productivity enhancement effect that
technology might have on teachers. Similarly, additional arms can help disentangle the
multiple causal mechanisms that might be driving the effect, including additional instruc-
tional time and the interaction with the chatbot with teacher support.
Understanding the long-term impacts of the intervention is also crucial. Future studies
should investigate whether the positive effects observed in the short term persist over
time, contributing to lasting improvements in students’ academic trajectories. Similarly,
from a policy perspective, it would be valuable to assess whether an after-school pro-
gram like this leads to a long-term shift in effort or time away from productive in-school
activities, and whether an in-school program might offer even greater effectiveness as an
alternative.15
Finally, further research could explore whether students are transferring -without explicit
instruction- their skills in using AI tools from one subject area to another. For exam-
ple, future studies could examine whether familiarity with AI tools in English language
lessons enhances student performance in other subjects, such as mathematics or science.
This cross-curricular application of AI would provide insights into the broader academic
potential of LLMs in education.
15For a discussion on the advantages and disadvantages of after-school programs related to computer-
assisted adaptive learning, see Mo et al. (2014).
20

=== p23 ===
4.3
Policy Implications
The findings of this pilot intervention highlight several promising policy implications for
addressing the learning crisis in developing countries, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa.
First, the intervention demonstrated substantial impacts on learning outcomes, despite
some implementation challenges, such as internet disruptions and power outages. This
is particularly encouraging for countries grappling with severe teacher shortages, high
population growth, and increasing teacher attrition rates. One key takeaway for poli-
cymakers is that investing in AI-powered tutoring programs powered by LLMs, could
significantly increase teacher productivity, which is consistent with recent qualitative ev-
idence (Keppler et al., 2024). By supplementing traditional classroom instruction with
AI-based support, education systems can deliver personalized learning experiences, par-
ticularly in contexts where human resources are stretched thin.
Second, the program shows that LLMs can improve learning when used properly. A re-
cent debate in the literature seems to show that LLMs can harm learning when used as
shortcuts, in other words, when used to facilitate responses to students’ questions without
encouraging them to think. These are results found in studies such as Bastani et al. (2024).
Some studies have also shown that the use of LLMs can lead to lower-quality reason-
ing and argumentation when students use them to search for information (Stadler et al.,
2024). Contrarily, the intervention we assessed seems to suggest that LLMs can improve
learning when used specifically as tutors adapted to specific use cases and contexts via
prompting. Thus, the findings are consistent with the idea emphasized in Gerlich (2025)
that educational strategies should promote critical engagement with AI technologies in
order to avoid cognitive offloading, which might reduce critical thinking skills. The in-
tervention evaluated in this paper leveraged third key mechanisms to achieve effective
tutoring. First, the prompts were intentionally crafted to guide the LLM to provide ex-
planations and support grounded in the principles of the science of learning, rather than
simply supplying direct answers. Second, teachers played an essential role in monitoring
and guiding students’ use of the LLM to ensure it was used appropriately and produc-
tively. Third, the content of each session was aligned with the official curriculum.16
In other words, we interpret that the intervention as a whole -which includes the inter-
action with the LLM and teacher guidance with specific prompts- is driving the results.
We have reasons to believe that the effects are not driven solely by the additional time
16In this context, while our intervention differs in its use of LLMs, it aligns more closely with ”computer-
assisted instruction”—integrated into teachers’ instruction and curriculum—than with ”computer-assisted
learning,” which operates independently. This distinction is outlined by Bai et al. (2016).
21

=== p24 ===
with teachers, given that the impact of human tutoring tends to be very low when is
not one-on-one or in small groups (Nickow et al., 2020; Kraft and Lovison, 2024).17 This
interpretation suggests that there might be complementarities between teachers and tech-
nology and the way technology is used and deployed is critical to understand its impact.
Following Muralidharan et al. (2019), our results can also be interpreted as showing the
extent to which using technology -and in particular, LLMs- in education can raise the
productivity of an instructor.18
Third, although this intervention was conducted on a pilot scale, its cost-effectiveness
makes it a promising candidate for large-scale implementation. While the effect sizes of
interventions typically decrease as sample sizes grow (Evans and Yuan, 2022), the rapid
advancements in LLMs and the potential for improving the implementation process sug-
gest that future iterations of the program could be even more impactful. Moreover, the
fact that the intervention was implemented with local staff (including teachers and mon-
itors), might help with its scalability. Similarly, the use of a free tool, rather than tradi-
tional subscription-based computer-adaptive software, can significantly lower marginal
costs. Moreover, LLMs offer a distinct advantage for adaptive learning: they eliminate
the need to develop extensive question banks with varying difficulty levels to accurately
categorize students into performance tiers, a requirement that Rodriguez-Segura (2022)
emphasizes is essential for traditional adaptive software. This potential for scalability
is particularly important for policy makers seeking affordable, efficient ways to address
learning gaps in resource-constrained environments.
Fourth, while AI interventions have the potential to reduce learning gaps, policy makers
must be vigilant about areas where such programs could inadvertently widen inequities.
Although the intervention may offer Pareto-optimal benefits, disparities in digital literacy
and access to technology could exacerbate existing inequalities. A prerequisite to ensure
that all students can benefit from AI-powered tutors, digital skills and AI literacy pro-
grams should be introduced early in the curriculum in a practical and inclusive manner
and teachers should receive training to leverage digital skills to improve their pedagog-
ical practice and support students to be digital and AI literate. Additionally, significant
investments in infrastructure and equipment are needed to provide equitable access to
technology across regions. Policy makers must ensure that efforts to integrate AI into
17Furthermore, Rodriguez-Segura (2022) compares B¨uchel et al. (2022), a study from El Salvador, and
Ma et al. (2024), a study from China, to suggest that in traditional computer-assisted adaptive learning,
additional instructional time is unlikely to be the primary driver of improved outcomes in countries with
relatively low state capacity, such as Nigeria.
18This aligns with the perspective presented by Mollick and Mollick (2023b), of AI as a “force multiplier”
for instructors if implemented cautiously and thoughtfully in service of evidence-based teaching practices.
22

=== p25 ===
education are accompanied by initiatives that address the digital divide, particularly in
low-income and rural areas. This may require a realignment of priorities across sectors,
as education budgets are often heavily weighted toward recurrent expenditures such as
salaries.
Finally, the rapid development of generative AI presents a unique opportunity to tackle
the global learning crisis. By harnessing the responsible use of AI to provide personal-
ized, adaptive learning at scale, governments can take decisive steps toward improving
learning outcomes in contexts that have traditionally faced significant educational chal-
lenges.
23

=== p26 ===
References
ACHIAM, J., S. ADLER, S. AGARWAL, L. AHMAD, I. AKKAYA, F. L. ALEMAN,
D. ALMEIDA, J. ALTENSCHMIDT, S. ALTMAN, S. ANADKAT, ET AL. (2023): “GPT-4
Technical Report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774.
ANGEL-URDINOLA, D., C. AVITABILE, AND M. CHINEN (2023): Can Digital Personalized
Learning for Mathematics Remediation Level the Playing Field in Higher Education? Experi-
mental Evidence from Ecuador, The World Bank.
ANGRIST, J. D. AND G. W. IMBENS (1995): “Two-Stage Least Squares Estimation of Aver-
age Causal Effects in Models with Variable Treatment Intensity,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 90, 431–442.
ANGRIST, N., E. AURINO, H. A. PATRINOS, G. PSACHAROPOULOS, E. VEGAS,
R. NORDJO, AND B. WONG (2023): “Improving Learning in Low- and Lower-Middle-
Income Countries,” Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis, 14, 55–80.
ANGRIST, N., D. K. EVANS, D. FILMER, R. GLENNERSTER, H. ROGERS, AND S. SABAR-
WAL (2025): “How to Improve Education Outcomes Most Efficiently? A Review of the
Evidence Using a Unified Metric,” Journal of Development Economics, 172, 103382.
BAI, Y., D. MO, L. ZHANG, M. BOSWELL, AND S. ROZELLE (2016): “The Impact of In-
tegrating ICT with Teaching: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Rural
Schools in China,” Computers & Education, 96, 1–14.
BANERJEE, A., R. BANERJI, J. BERRY, E. DUFLO, H. KANNAN, S. MUKHERJI, M. SHOT-
LAND, AND M. WALTON (2016): “Mainstreaming an Effective Intervention: Evidence
from Randomized Evaluations of “Teaching at the Right Level” in India,” Tech. rep.,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
BANERJEE, A., R. BANERJI, E. DUFLO, R. GLENNERSTER, AND S. KHEMANI (2008): “Pit-
falls of Participatory Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Education
in India,” Working Paper 14311, National Bureau of Economic Research.
BANERJEE, A. V., S. COLE, E. DUFLO, AND L. LINDEN (2007): “Remedying Education:
Evidence from Two Randomized Experiments in India,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 122, 1235–1264.
BASTANI, H., O. BASTANI, A. SUNGU, H. GE, O. KABAKCI, AND R. MARIMAN (2024):
“Generative AI Can Harm Learning,” Available at SSRN, 4895486.
BHATT, M. P., J. GURYAN, S. A. KHAN, M. LAFOREST-TUCKER, AND B. MISHRA (2024):
“Can Technology Facilitate Scale? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation of High
Dosage Tutoring,” Working Paper 32510, National Bureau of Economic Research.
BJORK, R. A. (1994): “Memory and metamemory considerations in the training of human
beings,” .
24

=== p27 ===
BLOOM, B. S. (1984): “The 2 Sigma Problem: The Search for Methods of Group Instruction
as Effective as One-to-One Tutoring,” Educational Researcher, 13, 4–16.
BRUHN, M. AND D. MCKENZIE (2009): “In pursuit of balance: Randomization in practice
in development field experiments,” American economic journal: applied economics, 1, 200–
232.
B ¨UCHEL, K., M. JAKOB, C. K ¨UHNHANSS, D. STEFFEN, AND A. BRUNETTI (2022): “The
Relative Effectiveness of Teachers and Learning Software: Evidence from a Field Ex-
periment in El Salvador,” Journal of Labor Economics, 40, 737–777.
DAS, A. S. (2024): “Chapter 4 - KoboToolbox,” in Open Electronic Data Capture Tools for
Medical and Biomedical Research and Medical Allied Professionals, ed. by A. Pundhir, A. K.
Mehto, and A. Jaiswal, Academic Press, 241–329.
DENG, R., M. JIANG, X. YU, Y. LU, AND S. LIU (2024): “Does ChatGPT Enhance Student
Learning? A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Experimental Studies,” Comput-
ers & Education, 105224.
DUFLO, E., P. DUPAS, AND M. KREMER (2011): “Peer Effects, Teacher Incentives, and
the Impact of Tracking: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya,” American
Economic Review, 101, 1739–1774.
DUNLOSKY, J., K. A. RAWSON, E. J. MARSH, M. J. NATHAN, AND D. T. WILLINGHAM
(2013): “Improving students’ learning with effective learning techniques: Promising di-
rections from cognitive and educational psychology,” Psychological Science in the Public
interest, 14, 4–58.
EVANS, D. AND F. YUAN (2019): “Equivalent Years of Schooling: A Metric to Communi-
cate Learning Gains in Concrete Terms,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper.
EVANS, D. K. AND A. MENDEZ ACOSTA (forthcoming): “Teacher Demand in African
Countries: Trends and Challenges,” CGD Working Paper, Center for Global Develop-
ment.
EVANS, D. K. AND F. YUAN (2022): “How Big Are Effect Sizes in International Education
Studies?” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 44, 532–540.
FEENSTRA, R. C., R. INKLAAR, AND M. P. TIMMER (2015): “The Next Generation of the
Penn World Table,” American Economic Review, 105, 3150–3182.
FILMER, D., H. ROGERS, N. ANGRIST, AND S. SABARWAL (2020): “Learning-Adjusted
Years of Schooling (LAYS): Defining a New Macro Measure of Education,” Economics of
Education Review, 77, 101971.
FRYER, R. G. AND M. HOWARD-NOVECK (2020): “High-Dosage Tutoring and Reading
Achievement: Evidence from New York City,” Journal of Labor Economics, 38, 421–452.
25

=== p28 ===
GERLICH, M. (2025): “AI Tools in Society: Impacts on Cognitive Offloading and the Fu-
ture of Critical Thinking,” Societies, 15, 6.
GLEWWE, P., N. ILIAS, AND M. KREMER (2010): “Teacher Incentives,” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 205–227.
GURYAN, J., J. LUDWIG, M. P. BHATT, P. J. COOK, J. M. V. DAVIS, K. DODGE, G. FARKAS,
J. FRYER, ROLAND G., S. MAYER, H. POLLACK, L. STEINBERG, AND G. STODDARD
(2023): “Not Too Late: Improving Academic Outcomes among Adolescents,” American
Economic Review, 113, 738–765.
HENKEL, O., H. HORNE-ROBINSON, N. KOZHAKHMETOVA, AND A. LEE (2024): “Ef-
fective and Scalable Math Support: Experimental Evidence on the Impact of an AI-
Math Tutor in Ghana,” in International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education,
Springer, 373–381.
ITO, H., K. KASAI, H. NISHIUCHI, AND M. NAKAMURO (2021): “Does Computer-Aided
Instruction Improve Children’s Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills?” Asian Development
Review, 38, 98–118.
KANG, S. H. (2016): “Spaced repetition promotes efficient and effective learning: Policy
implications for instruction,” Policy Insights from the Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3, 12–
19.
KEPPLER, S., W. P. SINCHAISRI, AND C. SNYDER (2024): “Backwards Planning with Gen-
erative AI: Case Study Evidence from US K12 Teachers,” Available at SSRN.
KESTIN, G., K. MILLER, A. KLALES, T. MILBOURNE, AND G. PONTI (2024): “AI Tutoring
Outperforms Active Learning,” Research Square.
KRAFT, M. A. AND V. S. LOVISON (2024): “The Effect of Student-Tutor Ratios: Exper-
imental Evidence from a Pilot Online Math Tutoring Program. EdWorkingPaper No.
24-976,” Annenberg Institute for School Reform at Brown University.
KUMAR, H., D. M. ROTHSCHILD, D. G. GOLDSTEIN, AND J. M. HOFMAN (2023): “Math
Education with Large Language Models: Peril or Promise?” Available at SSRN.
LAI, F., R. LUO, L. ZHANG, X. HUANG, AND S. ROZELLE (2015a): “Does Computer-
Assisted Learning Improve Learning Outcomes? Evidence from a Randomized Exper-
iment in Migrant Schools in Beijing,” Economics of Education Review, 47, 34–48.
LAI, F., L. ZHANG, Q. QU, X. HU, Y. SHI, M. BOSWELL, AND S. ROZELLE (2015b):
“Teaching the Language of Wider Communication, Minority Students, and Overall Ed-
ucational Performance: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Qinghai Province,
China,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 63, 753–776.
LEE, D. S. (2005): “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on
Treatment Effects,” .
26

=== p29 ===
LEHMANN, M., P. B. CORNELIUS, AND F. J. STING (2024): “AI Meets the Classroom:
When Does ChatGPT Harm Learning?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.09047.
MA, Y., R. FAIRLIE, P. LOYALKA, AND S. ROZELLE (2024): “Isolating the “Tech” from
Edtech: Experimental Evidence on Computer-Assisted Learning in China,” Economic
Development and Cultural Change, 72, 1923–1962.
MCDERMOTT, K. B., P. K. AGARWAL, L. D’ANTONIO, H. L. ROEDIGER III, AND M. A.
MCDANIEL (2014): “Both multiple-choice and short-answer quizzes enhance later
exam performance in middle and high school classes.” Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: Applied, 20, 3.
MO, D., L. ZHANG, R. LUO, Q. QU, W. HUANG, J. WANG, Y. QIAO, M. BOSWELL, AND
S. ROZELLE (2014): “Integrating computer-assisted learning into a regular curriculum:
Evidence from a randomised experiment in rural schools in Shaanxi,” Journal of Devel-
opment Effectiveness, 6, 300–323.
MOLLICK, E. AND L. MOLLICK (2023a): “Assigning AI: Seven Approaches for Students,
with Prompts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.10052.
MOLLICK, E. R. AND L. MOLLICK (2023b): “Using AI to Implement Effective Teaching
Strategies in Classrooms: Five Strategies, Including Prompts,” The Wharton School Re-
search Paper.
MURALIDHARAN, K. (2017): “Field experiments in education in developing countries,”
in Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, Elsevier, vol. 2, 323–385.
MURALIDHARAN, K., A. SINGH, AND A. J. GANIMIAN (2019): “Disrupting Education?
Experimental Evidence on Technology-Aided Instruction in India,” American Economic
Review, 109, 1426–1460.
NICKOW, A., P. OREOPOULOS, AND V. QUAN (2020): “The Impressive Effects of Tutoring
on PreK-12 Learning: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of the Experimental
Evidence,” Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
PERERA, M. AND D. ABOAL (2019): “The Impact of a Mathematics Computer-Assisted
Learning Platform on Students’ Mathematics Test Scores,” MERIT Working Papers
2019-007, United Nations University - Maastricht Economic and Social Research In-
stitute on Innovation and Technology (MERIT).
RODRIGUEZ-SEGURA, D. (2022): “EdTech in Developing Countries: A Review of the Ev-
idence,” The World Bank Research Observer, 37, 171–203.
STADLER, M., M. BANNERT, AND M. SAILER (2024): “Cognitive Ease at a Cost: LLMs
Reduce Mental Effort but Compromise Depth in Student Scientific Inquiry,” Computers
in Human Behavior, 160, 108386.
27

=== p30 ===
VALDIVIA TEIXEIRA, S. (2019): “Capturing Cost Data,” https://thedocs.worldbank.
org/en/doc/994671553617734574-0090022019/original/CapturingCostData190314.
pdf, accessed: 2025-01-24.
VAN DER LINDEN, W. J. AND R. K. HAMBLETON (2015): Handbook of Item Response Theory,
CRC Press.
VANZO, A., S. P. CHOWDHURY, AND M. SACHAN (2024): “GPT-4 as a Homework
Tutor Can Improve Student Engagement and Learning Outcomes,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.15981.
VYAS, S. AND L. KUMARANAYAKE (2006): “Constructing socio-economic status indices:
how to use principal components analysis,” Health Policy and Planning, 21, 459–468.
WANG, R. E., A. T. RIBEIRO, C. D. ROBINSON, S. LOEB, AND D. DEMSZKY (2024): “Tu-
tor CoPilot: A Human-AI Approach for Scaling Real-Time Expertise,” ArXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.03017.
WEIDLICH, J., D. GAˇSEVI ´C, AND P. A. KIRSCHNER (2025): “ChatGPT in education: An
effect in search of a cause,” .
WEINSTEIN, Y., C. R. MADAN, AND M. A. SUMERACKI (2018): “Teaching the science of
learning,” Cognitive research: principles and implications, 3, 1–17.
WORLD BANK (2022): “The State of Global Learning Poverty Report: 2022 Update,” Tech.
rep., World Bank, accessed: 2024-09-20.
28

=== p31 ===
Table 1: Sample descriptive characteristics and balance on observables
Mean (treatment)
Mean (control)
Difference
SE
95% CI
Demographic characteristics
Female
0.773
0.795
-0.023
0.03
[-0.082,0.036]
Age
15.19
15.12
0.07
0.08
[-0.088,0.222]
SES index
0.059
-0.075
0.133
0.105
[-0.073,0.339]
Baseline test scores
First Term Exam
0.062
-0.069
0.131
0.073
[-0.013,0.275]
Second Term Exam
0.045
-0.05
0.096
0.073
[-0.048,0.24]
School
School A
0.031
0.018
0.013
0.011
[-0.009,0.035]
School B
0.045
0.071
-0.026
0.017
[-0.06,0.008]
School C
0.052
0.059
-0.007
0.017
[-0.04,0.026]
School D
0.242
0.347
-0.105
0.033
[-0.17,-0.04]
School E
0.052
0.033
0.019
0.015
[-0.009,0.047]
School F
0.095
0.134
-0.039
0.023
[-0.085,0.007]
School G
0.159
0.148
0.01
0.026
[-0.042,0.062]
School H
0.23
0.128
0.102
0.027
[0.048,0.156]
School I
0.095
0.062
0.032
0.019
[-0.006,0.07]
Note: Treatment and control groups refer to students randomly assigned to attend the Copilot
sessions. Demographic variables used to assess covariate balance in this table were measured in a
baseline survey. The SES index was estimated using the first factor from a Principal Components
Analysis consisting of indicators of access to certain goods (computers, phones), services (internet
connection), study spaces at home, and parents’ educational attainment. Baseline test scores were
measured by observing students’ performance in regular curricular school exams from the two
terms prior to the intervention.
29

=== p32 ===
Table 2: Intent To Treat (ITT) Effects on Main Outcomes
Dependent variable:
(1)
(2)
(3)
Total Score
Total Score
Third Term Exam
(Weighted)
(IRT Scaled)
Treatment
0.310∗∗∗
0.263∗∗∗
0.206∗∗∗
(0.068)
(0.068)
(0.067)
Second Term Exam
0.470∗∗∗
0.435∗∗∗
0.504∗∗∗
(0.038)
(0.038)
(0.042)
Constant
0.274
0.232
−0.334
(0.223)
(0.220)
(0.159)
School Fixed Effects
✓
✓
✓
Observations
654
654
636
Note: ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01. Heteroskedasticity-robust stan-
dard errors in parenthesis. Treatment is a dummy variable indicating
whether a student is assigned to attend the Copilot sessions. Outcome
in model 1 is the total score in the final learning assessment in the in-
tervention, as described in Section 4.1. Outcome in model 2 is the
same assessment score, but scaled using Item Response Theory mod-
els. Outcome in model 3 is the score obtained in the regular curricular
exam in the third school term, which took place after the intervention
and which content was unrelated to the intervention’s material. All
outcomes are standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard de-
viation of one.
30

=== p33 ===
Table 3: Intent To Treat (ITT) Effects on Specific Areas
Dependent variable:
(1)
(2)
(3)
English Skills
Digital Skills
AI Skills
Score
Score
Score
Treatment
0.238∗∗∗
0.139∗
0.309∗∗∗
(0.068)
(0.076)
(0.077)
Second Term Exam
0.401∗∗∗
0.324∗∗∗
0.344∗∗∗
(0.038)
(0.041)
(0.042)
Constant
0.153
0.228
0.350
(0.238)
(0.159)
(0.224)
School Fixed Effects
✓
✓
✓
Observations
654
654
654
Note: ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01. Heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors in parenthesis. Treatment is a dummy variable
indicating whether a student is assigned to attend the Copilot
sessions. Outcome in model 1 is the total score in the final learn-
ing assessment in the intervention, as described in Section 4.1.
Outcome in model 2 is the same assessment score, but scaled us-
ing Item Response Theory models. Outcome in model 3 is the
score obtained in the regular curricular exam in the third school
term, which took place after the intervention and which content
was unrelated to the intervention’s material. All outcomes are
standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation
of one.
31

=== p34 ===
Table 4: Heterogeneity in treatment effect by gender, socio-economic
status and previous students’ performance
Interaction Term Variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
Female
Second Term
SES Index
Exam Score
Treatment
−0.039
0.311∗∗∗
0.305∗∗∗
(0.172)
(0.068)
(0.071)
Second Term Exam
0.477∗∗∗
0.393∗∗∗
0.480∗∗∗
(0.038)
(0.048)
(0.039)
Treatment * Second Term Exam
0.151∗∗
(0.072)
Female
−0.293
(0.294)
Treatment * Female
0.420∗∗
(0.188)
SES Index
−0.054
(0.033)
Treatment * SES Index
0.113∗∗
(0.047)
Constant
0.521
0.257
0.257
(0.362)
(0.229)
(0.222)
School Fixed Effects
✓
✓
✓
Observations
654
654
617
Note: ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors in parenthesis. All models use as dependent variable the total
score in the final learning assessment in the intervention, as described
in Section 4.1. The interaction term in model 1 includes a dummy vari-
able for female students.
The interaction term in model 2 includes
the score obtained by students in their regular curricular school exams
from the second school term. The interaction term in model 3 includes
the SES index, which was estimated using the first factor from a Prin-
cipal Components Analysis consisting of indicators of access to cer-
tain goods (computers, phones), services (internet connection), study
spaces at home, and parents’ educational attainment.
32

=== p35 ===
Table 5: Dose-response analysis of attendance to the program’s sessions: IV estimates
Dependent variable:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Total Score
Total Score
Third Term
Digital Skills
AI Skills
English Skills
(Weighted)
(IRT Scaled)
Exam
Score
Score
Score
Days of attendance
0.033∗∗∗
0.028∗∗∗
0.022∗∗∗
0.015∗
0.033∗∗∗
0.025∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.007)
Constant
0.215
0.183
−0.372∗∗
0.202
0.291
0.108
(0.224)
(0.223)
(0.163)
(0.166)
(0.227)
(0.239)
School Fixed Effects
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Observations
654
654
636
654
654
654
R2
0.262
0.233
0.318
0.133
0.140
0.204
Note: ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. All models are
two-stage least square estimates in which the main independent variable, the number of days of attendance to
the Copilot workshop sessions, is instrumented for with a dummy variable indicated having been randomly
assigned to attend them. Models 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 use as dependent variable the total score in the final learning
assessment in the intervention, as described in Section 4.1, either the total score (models 1 and 2) or scores in
specific sections of the exam (models 4, 5 and 6). Model 6 uses as dependent variable the score in students’
third term regular curricular exam.
33

=== p36 ===
Table 6: Dose-response analysis of attendance to the program’s sessions: OLS estimates
Dependent variable:
OLS VA (full sample)
OLS VA (Treatment group)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Total Score
Total Score
Third Term
Total Score
Total Score
Third Term
(Weighted)
(IRT Scaled)
Exam
(Weighted)
(IRT Scaled)
Exam
Days of attendance
0.034∗∗∗
0.029∗∗∗
0.022∗∗∗
0.041∗∗∗
0.034∗∗
0.050∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.016)
(0.015)
(0.017)
Second Term Exam
0.418∗∗∗
0.399∗∗∗
0.498∗∗∗
0.498∗∗∗
0.502∗∗∗
0.454∗∗∗
(0.036)
(0.036)
(0.037)
(0.054)
(0.053)
(0.052)
Constant
−0.229∗∗∗
−0.212∗∗∗
−0.117∗∗
−0.305∗∗
−0.272∗
−0.395∗∗
(0.046)
(0.047)
(0.047)
(0.155)
(0.144)
(0.169)
Observations
654
654
636
344
344
336
R2
0.225
0.198
0.268
0.260
0.250
0.233
Note: ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. All models
are ordinary least square estimates in which the main independent variable is the number of days of atten-
dance to the Copilot workshop sessions. Models 1, 2 and 3 analyze the entire sample, while models 4, 5 and
6 replicate the analysis in a sample restricted to the treatment group. Models 1, 2, 4 and 5 use as dependent
variable the total score in the final learning assessment in the intervention, as described in Section 4.1. Mod-
els 3 and 6 use as dependent variable the score in students’ third term regular curricular exam.
34

=== p37 ===
Table 7: Dose-response analysis of attendance to the program’s sessions: OLS estimates
Dependent variable:
OLS VA (full sample)
OLS VA (Treatment group)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Total Score
Total Score
Third Term
Total Score
Total Score
Third Term
(Weighted)
(IRT Scaled)
Exam
(Weighted)
(IRT Scaled)
Exam
Days of attendance
0.013
0.018
−0.021
−0.006
0.020
0.025
(0.030)
(0.029)
(0.029)
(0.057)
(0.053)
(0.061)
Days of attendance
0.002
0.001
0.004
0.003
0.001
0.002
(squared)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
Second Term Exam
0.418∗∗∗
0.399∗∗∗
0.498∗∗∗
0.500∗∗∗
0.503∗∗∗
0.456∗∗∗
(0.036)
(0.036)
(0.037)
(0.054)
(0.053)
(0.053)
Constant
−0.221∗∗∗
−0.208∗∗∗
−0.100∗∗
−0.147
−0.223
−0.313
(0.047)
(0.048)
(0.048)
(0.224)
(0.197)
(0.256)
Observations
654
654
636
344
344
336
R2
0.226
0.198
0.270
0.261
0.250
0.233
Note: ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. All models
are ordinary least square estimates in which the main independent variable is the number of days of atten-
dance to the Copilot workshop sessions. Models 1, 2 and 3 analyze the entire sample, while models 4, 5 and
6 replicate the analysis in a sample restricted to the treatment group. Models 1, 2, 4 and 5 use as dependent
variable the total score in the final learning assessment in the intervention, as described in Section 4.1. Mod-
els 3 and 6 use as dependent variable the score in students’ third term regular curricular exam.
35

=== p38 ===
Table 8: Sensitivity analysis: results exclud-
ing iteratively each school from the sample
Dependent variable:
Total Score (weighted)
Excluding School A
0.305∗∗∗
(0.068)
Excluding School B
0.351∗∗∗
(0.070)
Excluding School C
0.314∗∗∗
(0.068)
Excluding School D
0.156∗
(0.085)
Excluding School E
0.319∗∗∗
(0.070)
Excluding School F
0.360∗∗∗
(0.072)
Excluding School G
0.291∗∗∗
(0.074)
Excluding School H
0.346∗∗∗
(0.074)
Excluding School I
0.346∗∗∗
(0.070)
Note:
∗p<0.1;
∗∗p<0.05;
∗∗∗p<0.01.
Heteroskedasticity-robust
standard
er-
rors in parenthesis.
Each row shows
the coefficient for the treatment dummy
variable of the baseline model, where the
dependent variable is the total score in
the final learning assessment in the inter-
vention, as described in Section 4.1.
All
models include control for second term
exam performance and school fixed effects.
36

=== p39 ===
Table 9: Correlates of Attendance
Dependent variable:
Days of Attendance
(1)
(2)
(3)
Female
−1.600∗∗∗
−1.946∗∗∗
−2.394
(0.492)
(0.547)
(1.913)
SES Index
0.348∗∗∗
0.257∗
0.243∗
(0.134)
(0.145)
(0.146)
Second Term Exam Score
0.397∗
0.351
(0.207)
(0.227)
Constant
6.532∗∗∗
6.625∗∗∗
10.481∗∗∗
(0.443)
(0.497)
(2.347)
School Fixed Effects
N
N
✓
Observations
712
615
615
Note: ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01. Heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors in parenthesis. All models use as dependent
variable the total number of days each student attended the
Copilot workshop.
37

=== p40 ===
Table 10: Lee bounds estimates of ITT effects
Dependent variable:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Total Score
English Skills
Digital Skills
AI Skills
(Weighted)
Score
Score
Score
Lower
0.255
0.202
0.138
0.232
(0.072)
(0.074)
(0.08)
(0.079)
Upper
0.327
0.238
0.145
0.351
(0.069)
(0.074)
(0.077)
(0.071)
95% CI
[0.115, 0.462]
[0.058, 0.384]
[-0.018, 0.297]
[0.078, 0.489]
Note: Analytic standard errors in parentheses. This table presents Lee (2009) bounds on the ITT effects of
being selected to participate in the after-school program, on different outcome variables. The models are
equivalent to those in Tables 2 and 3, for easier interpretability of the results. The bounds are tightened
using dummy variables for each school.
38

=== p41 ===
Table 11: ITT estimates with inverse probability weighting for attrition
Dependent variable:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Total Score
Total Score
Third Term
English Skills
Digital Skills
AI Skills
(Weighted)
(IRT Scaled)
Exam
Score
Score
Score
Treatment
0.272∗∗∗
0.227∗∗∗
0.134∗∗
0.194∗∗∗
0.102
0.301∗∗∗
(0.067)
(0.067)
(0.059)
(0.068)
(0.075)
(0.074)
Second Term Exam
0.456∗∗∗
0.408∗∗∗
0.459∗∗∗
0.387∗∗∗
0.309∗∗∗
0.331∗∗∗
(0.040)
(0.038)
(0.040)
(0.038)
(0.045)
(0.043)
Constant
0.313
0.261
−0.206
0.201
0.227
0.347
(0.229)
(0.222)
(0.167)
(0.242)
(0.160)
(0.223)
School Fixed Effects
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Observations
700
700
858
700
700
700
R2
0.246
0.210
0.329
0.186
0.124
0.140
Note: ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. Treatment is
a dummy variable indicating random assignment to the treatment. Results in this table are weighted by the
inverse of the predicted probability of being present in the measurement of the outcome. The probability
is predicted using a probit model with second-term exam, sex of the student and dummies for individual
schools as predictors. Models 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 use as dependent variable the total score in the final learning
assessment in the intervention, as described in Section 4.1, either the total score (models 1 and 2) or scores in
specific sections of the exam (models 4, 5 and 6). Model 3 uses as dependent variable the score in students’
third term regular curricular exam.
39

=== p42 ===
Table 12: Analysis of selection into lottery: results of eligible v. ineligible students
Dependent variable:
First Term Exam
Second Term Exam
(1)
(2)
Not eligible for Lottery
−0.085∗
0.147∗∗∗
(0.049)
(0.050)
Constant
0.332∗∗
0.222∗
(0.138)
(0.126)
Observations
1,564
1,586
R2
0.149
0.138
Note: ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses.
40

=== p43 ===
Table 13: Program Costs
6-week Program Cost
4-quarter Program Cost
Fixed Cost
Content Development
9,900
27,900
Equipment/ICT
1,400
1,400
Communications/PR
400
400
Travel
2,000
2,000
Total Fixed Cost
13,740
31,740
Variable Cost
Data and Instructional Support
2,400
9,600
Equipment/ICT
2,321
9,286
Participant Fringe Benefits
4,844
16,559
Program Management
1,000
1,000
Tutor Stipends and Transportation
1,964
7,857
Tutor Training
5,400
5,400
Total Variable Cost
17,929
49,702
Grand Total
31,669
81,442
A. Program Size
Participants
657
657
Tutors and Monitors
55
55
Students/Tutor
12
12
Schools
9
9
B. Costs
Total Cost
31,669
81,442
Variable Cost
17,929
49,702
C. Average Total Cost
Per Participant
48
124
D. Average Variable Cost
Per Participant
27
76
Note: This table presents a detailed breakdown of the pilot program’s costs. Costs are
calculated using the 6-week program budget information and pro rata basis. Hardware
costs are estimated considering the depreciation incurred during the pilot. Electricity and
school infrastructure costs are not included. Cost estimates for a 4-quarter program are
based on the 6-week program. All costs are in current US dollars, with conversions from
Naira based on an exchange rate of USD/Naira = 1,400. ”Tutors and Monitors” include
back-up staff.
41

=== p44 ===
Table 14: Program Implementation Timeline: Selected Activities
Category/Activity
Start
Completion
Planning and Setup
Project kick-off meeting
-
3/27/24
Discussion sessions: Ministry of Education
4/15/24
4/18/24
and Directors
Schools and labs’ assessment
4/15/24
4/22/24
Staff and student selection
4/15/24
5/27/24
Student enrollment/ expression of interest to participate
4/26/24
5/27/24
Training materials and curriculum development
4/9/24
5/10/24
Teachers and monitors selection
4/22/24
5/03/24
Procurement of goods and services
4/23/24
5/15/24
Randomization (control and treatment groups)
5/27/24
5/28/24
Baseline questionnaire
5/30/24
6/1/24
Setup for training sessions
5/10/24
5/23/24
Pilot Implementation
Teacher training sessions
5/24/24
5/26/24
Monitoring training sessions
5/28/24
5/29/24
Pilot sessions
6/3/24
7/11/24
Pilot monitoring
6/3/24
7/11/24
Pilot Evaluation and Report
Standardized assessment
7/11/24
7/12/24
Third term examination
7/12/24
7/12/24
Endline questionnaire
7/14/24
7/14/24
Evaluation analysis
7/15/24
8/30/24
Reporting and presentation
8/30/24
10/30/24
42

=== p45 ===
Figure 1: Distribution of Assessment Scores (combined) by Treatment Condition.
Figure 2: Distribution of English Scores by Treatment Condition.
43

=== p46 ===
Figure 3: Distribution of Third Term Exam Scores by Treatment Condition.
Figure 4: Dose-Response Relation.
44

=== p47 ===
Figure 5: Distribution of the number of days of attendance to the program in the treatment
group.
45

=== p48 ===
Figure 6: Distribution of first term exam scores by lottery eligibility.
Figure 7: Distribution of second term exam scores by lottery eligibility.
46

=== p49 ===
Figure 8: Locations of the Schools in the Sample.
47

=== p50 ===
A
Appendix: Images from the after-school sessions and
session guidelines
Figure 9: Students participate in an after-school session in Benin City, Nigeria.
Figure 10: Students participate in an after-school session in Benin City, Nigeria, in a
female-only school.
48

=== p51 ===
Figure 11: Samples of student guidelines.
49
