 
 Estonia Announces A Groundbreaking National Initiative: AI Leap Programme to Bring AI Tools to All Schools | Haridus- ja Teadusministeerium 
 Skip to main content
 Accessibility
 Haridus- ja Teadusministeeriumi koduleht on ehitatud ja koostatud vastama WCAG 2.0 AA juurdepääsetavuse suunistele. See tähendab, et kasutatud on tehnilisi vahendeid, mis aitavad kodulehe sisu tarbida võimalikult paljudel inimestel.
 Sellel kodulehel on võimalik navigeerida ainult klaviatuuri abil, suurendada sisu ning kasutada ekraanilugejat.
 Täpsemad juhised leiate  juurdepääsetavuse lehelt .
 Contrast
 Default settings
 Black background and yellow text
 Restore defaults 
 Confirm selection 
 Accessibility 
 EST 
 RUS 
 ENG 
 UA 
 ENG
 EST RUS ENG UA 
 Infosüsteemid 
 Infosüsteemid
 Infosüsteemid 
 EHIS - Eesti hariduse infosüsteem
 SAIS - sisseastumise infosüsteem
 EIS - Eksamite infosüsteem
 ETIS - Eesti teadusinfosüsteem
 TAHVEL - Õppeinfosüsteem 
 E-koolikott - digiõppevara portaal
 Haridusstatistika portaal Haridussilm 
 Kutseregister
 Education, research and youth affairs 
 General education
 General education in Estonia 
 Reform of obligation to learn 
 Availability of international general education in Estonia 
 Vocational education 
 Higher education 
 Adult education 
 Learning materials 
 Special educational needs 
 Teacher policy 
 Qualifications 
 External evaluation 
 Recognition of prior learning and work experience 
 Research and development
 Research programmes 
 Research funding 
 Research infrastructure 
 Youth affairs
 Youth policy 
 Youth work 
 Estonian and foreign languages 
 Estonian language
 Transition to Estonian-language education 
 Official language and level examinations 
 Programmes 
 Learning the Estonian language abroad 
 Language study materials 
 Foreign languages
 Foreign language learning in Estonia 
 International cooperation 
 European Union and international cooperation
 European Union 
 OECD 
 Bilateral agreements 
 Regional cooperation 
 Other international institutions 
 International development cooperation 
 Educational service export 
 Contacts
 Area of EU and International Cooperation 
 Ministry 
 Ministry
 Introduction and structure 
 Minister Kristina Kallas 
 Management 
 Legislation 
 Strategic planning for 2021–2035 
 Processing of personal data 
 Statistics and analysis
 PISA 
 PIAAC 
 TALIS 
 Eurydice 
 Refernet 
 News and press
 News 
 Press contact: [email protected] 
 Contacts
 Ministry contacts 
 Area of EU and International Cooperation 
 Education for Ukrainian refugees 
 Transition to Estonian-language education 
 Breadcrumb
 News 
 Estonia Announces A Groundbreaking National Initiative: AI Leap Programme to Bring AI Tools to All Schools 
 Estonia Announces A Groundbreaking National Initiative: AI Leap Programme to Bring AI Tools to All Schools 
 25.02.2025 | 17:05
 1 image 
 Estonia Announces A Groundbreaking National Initiative: AI Leap Programme to Bring AI Tools to All Schools 
 Gallery
 54350201853_43b5cd1f3f_k.jpg 
 Download
 Estonia, one of the world's most advanced digital societies, announced today an ambitious nationwide artificial intelligence education program called AI Leap 2025 (TI-Hüpe 2025 in Estonian). The initiative, planned to be launched on 1 September 2025, will provide students and teachers with free access to the world's leading AI applications and the necessary skills to use them effectively in learning, marking the next chapter in Estonia's digital society journey.
 The program builds on the legacy of Estonia's historic Tiger Leap programme from nearly 30 years ago, which brought computers and internet early to all the Estonian schools and laid the foundation for the country's emergence as a digital pioneer. AI Leap will be the next such a public-private partnership aimed at integrating AI skills and capabilities seamlessly into education.
 "Just as the Tiger Leap programme initiated the development of e-Estonia, for which we are still known internationally today, we are now starting a new chapter in the development of our education system and digital society," said Estonian President Alar Karis , as the initiator of the programme. "Artificial intelligence has permanently changed the world, and like all sectors, the education system must adapt to these changes."
 "By implementing the best available technology in the education system and making learning not only smarter but also more personalized with it, it will help Estonia become the world's smartest nation. This way AI Leap helps smart solutions to reach all sectors and increase the international breakthrough capability of Estonians and the Estonian economy," Karis outlined the programme's vision.
 The initiative aims to maintain Estonia's educational excellence by providing students and teachers with free access to modern AI-based learning tools. The programme will initially include 20,000 high school students in grades 10-11 and their 3,000 teachers from the beginning of next school year on 1 September 2025. The plan is to expand the programme to vocational schools and new incoming 10th grade students the year after, adding further 38,000 students and 2,000 teachers to the pool.
 "Estonia's economic competitiveness depends on how well we can prepare young people for the age of artificial intelligence," said Minister of Education and Research Kristina Kallas . "In order for AI to support not only learning but also our economic growth, we will invest strongly in teacher training as part of the AI Leap. Well-prepared teachers will be able to implement AI capabilities smartly in schools."
 "In the future job market, the advantaged will not be those who can use AI the most, but those who can use it the smartest," said Linnar Viik,  co-founder of AI Leap and one of the original architects of Tiger Leap. "The education system cannot ignore or ban new technologies. Instead, schools must lead the implementation of technology by providing a supportive framework."
 International partnerships 
 In cooperation with the Ministry of Education and Research, teacher training is planned to be conducted by autumn 2025, after which students will be given access to the world's leading AI applications for learning. Negotiations have begun with global leading AI developers OpenAI and Anthropic, with plans to involve others as well.
 “Millions of students around the world are already using ChatGPT to enrich and personalise their learning. Estonia is setting an example for the world as one of the first countries to fully integrate AI into its education system for the benefit of all students and teachers,” said Leah Belsky , Vice President of Education, OpenAI. “We're excited to work with the government to offer equal access to this transformative technology and help ensure its future workforce is AI-ready.”
 "Estonia has been an international leader in educational improvement "This initiative shows us what's possible when a country builds on its successes and thinks big about AI and education," said Neerav Kingsland , Head of Business Development at Anthropic. ”By thoughtfully integrating AI tools to help teachers and support students, Estonia is creating a model that other countries will likely follow. We're proud to support Estonia's vision of using AI to help improve the lives of teachers and provide an amazing education to every student."
 About AI Leap 2025 
 AI Leap 2025 is a comprehensive national initiative to integrate artificial intelligence tools and skills into Estonia's education system. The programme will provide AI applications and training to students and teachers across Estonia, building on the country's legacy of digital innovation in education.
 To implement the programme, an AI Leap Foundation would be established this spring, with the government and private sector as co-founders. The Foundation would be tasked with the strategic management of artificial intelligence immersion into the education system. March 2025 will see the agreement on the foundation's specific tasks, founding members, and funding model.
 The initiative is a broad-based, cross-sector cooperation project developed by the President's Digital Council, Ministry of Education and Research, and assisted by numerous private entrepreneurs, including Taavet Hinrikus, Jaan Tallinn and Kaarel Kotkas.
 Timeline Highlights 
 - Spring 2025: creation of AI Leap Foundation in public-private partnership to steer and manage the programme
- September 2025: Launch with grades 10-11 (20,000 students and 3,000 teachers)
- September 2026: Expansion to vocational schools and new 10th grade students (additional 38,000 students and 2,000 teachers)
 Photos to download 
 tihupe.ee   
 Artificial intelligence 
 [email protected] 
 Related content
 Kallas at the Tallinn Digital Summit: Estonia’s true leap is to learn to think with artificial intelligence, not instead of it
 Estonia Announces A Groundbreaking National Initiative: AI Leap Programme to Bring AI Tools to All Schools
 Subscribe to newsletter
 Subscribe to the newsletter or follow social media channels of the Ministry of Education and Research.
 Subscribe to newsletters
 Ministry of Education and Research
 Munga 18, 50088 Tartu
 +372 735 0222
 [email protected] 
 Open Mon-Fri 8.30-17.00
 Cookies Processing of personal data 
 Subscribe to newsletter
 Would you like to receive news and notifications published on hm.ee by email? 
Indicate which notifications you would like to receive and enter your e-mail address. You will then receive a confirmation e-mail with instructions on how to modify or unsubscribe at a later date if you wish.
 I agree with privacy policy 
 Newsletters
 Ministeeriumi uudised 
 News 
 Новости министерства 
 Join 
