
 Indiana Department of Education: Digital Learning and Professional Development 
 Skip to main content
 IN.gov 
 An official website  of the Indiana State Government 
 --> Language Translation -->
 Governor Mike Braun 
 MENU
 Indiana Department of Education
 Start voice
 input 
 Frequent Searches 
 > Submit text
 search 
 DOE Home 
 About IDOE 
 Toggle submenu 
 About 
 Secretary Jenner 
 News 
 Toggle submenu 
 News Releases 
 Dr. Jenner's Weekly Update 
 Calendar 
 Contact 
 Newsletters 
 Student Learning and Pathways 
 Toggle submenu 
 Presidential Scholars Program 
 Indiana Cybersecurity Pathway 
 College and Career Navigation 
 Indiana’s Early Childhood Education Registered Teacher Apprenticeship 
 Chronic Absenteeism 
 Educators 
 Toggle submenu 
 Educators Overview 
 Educator Licensing 
 Toggle submenu 
 Licensing Overview 
 Approved MAT Programs 
 What Can I Teach with My License? 
 CPR and AED Certification 
 Current Educators 
 Educator Testing 
 Licensing Advisors 
 Principal Survey 
 Prospective Educators 
 School Corporation 
 Suicide Prevention Training 
 Application Instructions (step-by-step) 
 Convert Initial Practitioner to Practitioner License 
 Human Trafficking Training 
 Child Abuse and Neglect Training 
 Professional Educator License Extension 
 Teacher of the Year 
 Educator Evaluations 
 Toggle submenu 
 Evaluations Overview 
 Teacher Recognition 
 Legal 
 Toggle submenu 
 Case Review Panel 
 IDOE ADA Title II Coordinator 
 Certification under Title VI and SFFA v. Harvard 
 Commission on Seclusion & Restraint 
 Contracts 
 Data Requests 
 Educator Misconduct-Forms and FAQ 
 IDOE Rulemaking Docket 
 Toggle submenu 
 LSA 25-793 
 LSA 25-794 
 LSA 24-635 
 Public Records Requests 
 Vacant & Unused School Buildings 
 Data and Information Technology 
 Toggle submenu 
 Data and IT Overview 
 Data Center & Reports 
 IDOE Online Help 
 LINK Initiative 
 E-Rate Information 
 School Operations 
 Toggle submenu 
 Operations Overview 
 Finance 
 Toggle submenu 
 Finance Application Center 
 School Financial Reports 
 Summer School 
 Nutrition 
 Toggle submenu 
 Nutrition Overview 
 Summer Food Service Program 
 Child & Adult Care Food Program 
 School Nutrition Programs 
 Food Distribution Program 
 Transportation 
 Toggle submenu 
 School Transportation Administrators & Supervisor Information 
 IN Educator Job Board 
 Diplomas 
 Indiana's Accountability Model 
   Close Menu
 Digital Learning and Professional Development 
 Department of Education 
 Educators 
 Digital Learning and Professional Development 
 Digital Literacy in K-12 Education
 Digital literacy empowers Indiana students to think critically, communicate more safely, and engage responsibly in an increasingly digital world. Through high‑quality resources, guidance, and professional learning, the Indiana Department of Education supports schools in helping students build essential skills in areas such as artificial intelligence, online safety, virtual learning, and responsible digital citizenship.
 Artificial Intelligence
 Guidance & Resources
 Artificial Intelligence (AI) Guidance 
This document presents key considerations related to AI and education. 
 Professional Development Videos
 AI District Implementation Spotlight Series 
Join administrators, coaches, teachers, and students across the state of Indiana to hear them share their strategies, successes, and challenges related to artificial intelligence. 
 AI Insights for Educators Professional Development Series 
A collection of sessions designed to deepen educator understanding of instructional uses, best practices, and responsible approaches to AI in the classroom.
 AI in the Classroom Spotlight Session Collection 
Practical examples and demonstrations of AI tools and instructional applications used in Indiana schools.
 Reports
 AI Educator Survey Final Report: Digital Learning Grant 2024-2025 
The final report provides detailed information on the 2024 Digital Learning Grant awardees, teacher feedback data from survey response and AI platform vendor data from the grant implementation.
 AI-Powered Platform Pilot Grant Final Report 2023-2024 
The final report provides detailed information on the AI-Powered Platform Pilot Grant and awardees, teacher feedback data from survey responses, and AI platform vendor data.
 Internet Safety
 Professional Development, Guidance, & Resources
 Internet Safety Collection 
In response to IC 20-30-6.1-4, IDOE has curated this collection, which brings together resources to help students, educators, and families build essential digital literacy skills. Topics include misinformation, online privacy, cyberbullying, digital well-being, and preventing harm from online challenges. Lesson plans, conversation starters, and interactive tools support safe and ethical participation in the digital world. The collection encourages critical thinking and responsible online behavior.
 Virtual Learning
 Virtual learning in Indiana provides students with flexible, technology‑enhanced instructional opportunities while maintaining the same quality and rigor required for in‑person learning.
 Educators, administrators, and families can deepen their understanding of effective online instruction by exploring the Virtual Learning Essentials collection in the Indiana Learning Lab , which features expert-led sessions on engagement, accessibility, digital tools, and designing high‑quality virtual programs.
 Indiana provides a number of state‑accredited virtual schools. You can view the current list of accredited virtual schools on the Indiana Department of Education’s School Accreditation page .
 Grants
 The Digital Learning Grant aims to support Indiana public school corporations and charter schools in their efforts to leverage technology to enhance learning experiences, foster innovation for students, and promote effective digital pedagogies for teachers.To view future Digital Learning Grant opportunities subscribe to Dr. Jenner’s weekly update.
 2026 Digital Learning Grant Recipients 
 2025 DLG memo 
 2024 DLG memo 
 2023 DLG memo 
 Fall 2022 DLG memo 
 Spring 2022 DLG memo 
 Indiana Learning Lab 
 The Indiana Learning Lab is the premier platform for resources and professional development for educators, administrators, and parents. Join the Indiana Learning Lab using your school email for free access to high-quality support.
 Indiana Course Access Portal 
 iCAP (Indiana Code 20-30-16) provides students across the state with access to hundreds of online courses from approved education providers and colleges.
 Students can take courses that may not be available at their home school, helping them stay on track for graduation, explore new interests, and prepare for college or careers.
 Visit us in the Learning Lab!
 STEM in the  
 New to the Learning Lab?
 New users will be able to create an account and access the “ Tour the IN Learning Lab with Our Team ” resource to better understand how to navigate the Learning Lab.
 New users will need to follow these steps:
 Step 1 . Register for a Learning Lab account
 Step 2 : After registering, click the Learning Lab button again to learn how to navigate the Indiana Learning Lab
 Indiana Department of Education
 Online Services
 Indiana GPS 
 School Financial Reports (Form 9) 
 CNPweb 
 LINK Portal 
 Licensing Verification and Information System (LVIS) 
 Data Requests 
 Public Records Requests 
 Contacts Us
 1-317-232-6610 
 Contact Form 
 Dr. Jenner Scheduling Requests 
 Knowledge Hub Support 
 Social Media
 Facebook 
 Twitter 
 YouTube 
 Flickr 
 Email 
 Find Information
 State Information Live Chat 
 Email State Information Center 
 Find an Agency 
 Call: 1-800-457-8283 
 Text: 1-888-311-1846 
 Quick Information
 IN.gov User Survey 
 Advanced Search 
 Policies 
 Sitemap 
 IN.gov FAQs 
 State Employee
 Resources 
 State Information
 Maps & Information 
 IN.gov News &
 Events 
 Email Updates 
 Indiana Code 
 Indiana Administrative Code 
 Awards 
 Report
 Accessibility Issues 
 Copyright © 2026 State of Indiana - All rights reserved.
 