 
 Becoming a Khan Academy Districts Partner - Khan Academy Blog 
 Skip to content 
 Donate 
 Becoming a Khan Academy Districts Partner
 Thank you for considering becoming a Khan Academy District Partner! With over 400 partners across the US, the Districts program exists to help more students achieve grade level success through mastery learning– now with AI tools that help them persist in their practice of challenging material. This page will give you everything you need to get your partnership with Khan Academy started.
 To get a sense for our work, consider this recent segment of CBS’s 60 Minutes , which featured footage from our offices and of classrooms in School City of Hobart, an Indiana partner district of around 4,000 students using Khan Academy for Math, Science, ELA and SAT Prep. 
 What is a Khan Academy District Partnership?
 If you are considering an implementation between 250-1,000 students, you’ve come to the right spot! We’re here to explain how our paid District partnership program differs from the free version of Khan Academywith features and services specifically designed for school districts to support and measure teacher usage and student progress. We have two tiers for partnership, which are detailed below:
 District Partnership without Khanmigo for students: Includes asynchronous professional learning, aggregated reporting across schools and classrooms, a dedicated implementation manager, automated rostering via either Clever or ClassLink, and an integration with the NWEA MAP Growth exam.
 District Partnership with Khanmigo for students: Includes all of the above plus our AI-powered, 24/7 Socratic tutor for students.
 Each of these partnership types includes our Khanmigo teacher tools as well as any of our grades 3-12 subject areas including Math, Science, ELA, SAT Prep and more. Every student gets access to ALL of our content.  The minimum partnership size for each is 250 students, and rostering via Clever or ClassLink is a requirement. If you are considering an implementation with more than 1,000 students please contact us at districts@khanacademy.org  
 Watch this 9-minute demo to see the platform brought to life:
 For answers to our most commonly asked questions, read on. When you’re ready, the next step is to fill out the contract request form by clicking the button below. 
 Request Contract 
 FAQ
 My district is seeking less than 250 licenses. What’s the best option for us? 
 The best option for schools or districts with under 250 students is to continue driving teachers to create free Khan Academy accounts and roster their own students. 
 Our classroom tools are 100% free and include comprehensive access to all of our standards-aligned content, the ability to assign and track students’ work, our AI-powered Khanmigo teacher tools , and so much more. This teacher guide is a great resource on how to get started using Khan Academy in your teaching practice. 
 My district doesn’t use Clever or ClassLink. Can we roster another way? 
 No, our District Partnerships require a connection to either Clever or ClassLink so that we can auto-roster and run a nightly sync with your SIS. As a quick note to folks not currently using either platform: Clever is 100% free for schools to use! You can sign up for Clever here . 
 Alternatively, you can always use a free Khan Academy teacher account, which does not require Clever or ClassLink to roster.  
 Is there any professional learning included in a District Partnership? 
 Yes, partnerships between 250-1,000 students will receive asynchronous, on-demand professional learning for teachers and administrators. Please informational resources at the bottom of this page for links to these trainings
 What is Khanmigo for students and how do we purchase this? 
 Khanmigo AI Student Tutor is the only AI tool that is incorporated into Khan Academy’s world-class content library, which covers math, humanities, coding, social studies, and more.It is ethically designed with safety and learning as top priorities.  Learners get 1:1 personalized tutoring on every exercise, video, and article on Khan Academy, and can chat with Khanmigo about homework questions from outside the platform too. The cost of a District Partnership with Khanmigo for students is $15 per student.
 Requirements: Rostering via Clever or ClassLink; a minimum of 250 licenses; US-based districts only.
 What are MAP Growth Learning Paths and how do we purchase this? 
 Learning Paths is a feature of a Khan Academy Districts Partnership that accelerates student outcomes by providing a personalized learning path for each student based on their MAP Growth scores in 3rd-8th grade Math, Algebra 1, and Geometry. You can purchase Learning Paths in either a standard District Partnership or in a District Partnership with Khanmigo for students. The cost without Khanmigo for students is $10 per student and the cost with Khanmigo for students is $15 per student.   
 Requirements: Rostering via Clever for both Khan Academy Districts and MAP Growth; a minimum of 250 licenses; a completed Data Sharing Agreement with NWEA .
 Is there any support for grades K-2? 
 Yes, we invite you to use Khan Kids with your learners. Our app is 100% free to download and doesn’t have ads or require subscriptions. This administrator quick-start guide will be most helpful to you, and this teacher quick-start guide will be most relevant for teachers using the app for the first time.
 Our paid partnership, which includes access to web-based reporting tools for teachers and administrators, is $5 per student. We have a 200-student minimum if you do not use Clever for rostering. Please note that Khanmigo and/or Learning Paths are only available with a Khan Academy District partnership, which is grades 3-12.  If you have any questions as you begin using the app or want to discuss a Khan Kids partnership, please don’t hesitate to reach out to our team here . As a non-profit, Sal Khan and the Khan Academy team are focused on helping states and school districts drive deep student learning. You can see and hear from students, teachers and administrators who have already implemented Khan Academy’s AI tools district-wide in videos below.
 Request Contract 
 Informational Resources
 Khanmigo for Teachers Professional Learning Course 
 Khanmigo Administrators Course 
 Khan Academy and Official Digital SAT Prep Guide 
 Khan Academy and Clever Set-Up Guide 
 Khan Academy and ClassLink Set-Up Guide 
 Khan Academy Professional Learning Menu for School Year ’24-’25 
 See professional learning videos on Khanmigo for teachers of every subject 
 Look through Khan Academy’s AI for education playlist on YouTube 
 Menu 
 News 
 Khanmigo 
 Educators 
 ELA & Humanities 
 Math 
 Science 
 Financial Literacy 
 Districts 
 Khan Academy Kids 
 Families 
 Learners 
 Research 
 Engineering 
 Search
 Search for: 
 Strengthen every classroom.
 From individual learners to entire school systems, Khan Academy helps learning happen.
 Learn more 
 Visit Khan Academy 
 © 2026 Khan Academy
