NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
POLICE DISCRETION AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Felipe M. Gonçalves
Steven Mello
Working Paper 31678
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31678
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2023
We are grateful to Leila Agha, David Arnold, Eric Chyn, Will Dobbie, Ben Hansen, Peter Hull, 
Elisa Jacome, Louis Kaplow, Ilyana Kuziemko, Emily Leslie, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Erzo 
Luttmer, Alex Mas, Michael Mueller-Smith, Emily Nix, Sam Norris, Rodrigo Pinto, Bruce 
Sacerdote, Yotam Shem-Tov, Chris Snyder, Doug Staiger, Megan Stevenson, and Emily 
Weisburst, as well as seminar participants at Princeton, UCLA, Dartmouth, Case Western, UBC, 
Claremont McKenna, SDSU, Duke, Brown, Michigan, FRBNY, the SEA Annual Meeting, and 
NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments. We thank Jeffrey Bissainthe, Kiara Guzzo, 
Wilton Johnson, Timothy Kutta, Stacy Lehmann, Brenda Paige, and especially Beth Allman for 
assistance with acquiring the data from various Florida agencies. Jacklyn Pi provided excellent 
research assistance. The Princeton Industrial Relations Section provided generous financial 
support. Any errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been 
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies 
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Felipe M. Gonçalves and Steven Mello. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not 
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, 
including © notice, is given to the source.
Police Discretion and Public Safety
Felipe M. Gonçalves and Steven Mello
NBER Working Paper No. 31678
September 2023
JEL No. D73,J45,K42
ABSTRACT
We study the implications of police discretion for public safety. Highway patrol officers exercise 
discretion over fines by deviating from statutory fine rules. Relying on variation across officers in 
this discretionary behavior, we find that harsher sanctions reduce future traffic offending and 
crash involvement. We then show that officer discretion over sanctions decreases public safety by 
comparing observed reoffending rates with those in a counterfactual without discretion, estimated 
using an identification at infinity approach. About half the safety cost of discretion is due to 
officer decisions which result in harsh sanctions for motorists who are least deterred by them. We 
provide evidence that this officer behavior is attributable to a preference for allocating harsh fines 
to motorists with higher recidivism risk, who are also the least responsive to harsher sanctions.
Felipe M. Gonçalves
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
fgoncalves@econ.ucla.edu
Steven Mello
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
steve.mello@dartmouth.edu
1
Introduction
Ensuring public safety is a central function of the state. To that end, policy regimes specify
sanctions for socially undesirable behaviors (Becker, 1968). However, beyond the set of oﬃ-
cial policies, the state also relies on bureaucrats tasked with allocating sanctions in practice.
As in much of the public sector, these actors typically wield signiﬁcant discretion (Lip-
sky 1980; Wilson 1989). For example, patrolling police oﬃcers can overlook minor crimes,
prosecutors can reduce criminal charges, and judges can issue a wide range of sentences.
Permitting this type of discretion can have important beneﬁts if agents internalize the goals
of the state and can eﬀectively discern the allocation of sanctions that maximizes public
safety (e.g., Banﬁeld 1975; Kang & Silveira 2021). On the other hand, these decision-makers
may have poor information, attend to alternative objectives such as personal gain, or hold
competing notions of the optimal allocation when making decisions (e.g., Prendergast 2007).
A critical question raised by the pervasive discretion practiced by criminal justice agents,
then, is the extent to which that discretion improves public safety. We study this question in
the context of traﬃc enforcement, focusing on highway patrol oﬃcers who exercise discretion
over speeding sanctions by deviating from statutory ﬁne rules. To start, we document that
these discretionary choices have important implications for public safety: harsher ﬁnes reduce
a motorist’s future traﬃc oﬀending and likelihood of future crash involvement. Next, we show
that oﬃcer discretion reduces public safety by estimating reoﬀending rates in a counterfactual
scenario without discretion. We ﬁnd that oﬃcer choices of whom to sanction harshly play
an important role in explaining the net safety costs of discretion. In particular, eliminating
discretion results in harsh ﬁnes for motorists who typically see lenience when oﬃcers use
their discretion, and deterrence eﬀects are particularly large in the subsample. We conclude
by exploring potential explanations for this oﬃcer behavior, including oﬃcer preferences and
imperfect information.
Speeding enforcement is a high stakes setting in terms of public safety. In 2020, there
were nearly twice as many traﬃc fatalities (∼39,000) as homicides (∼22,000) in the United
States.
Economic costs associated with motor vehicle accidents have been estimated at
nearly $250 billion per year, higher than annual costs of crime victimization (Blincoe et al.
2015; Chalﬁn 2016). Standard estimates suggest that at least one third of fatal crashes
are caused by speeding and existing studies have found strong associations between average
driving speeds and traﬃc fatalities (NHTSA 2014; Ashenfelter & Greenstone 2004).
While speeding sanctions are statutorily based only on a driver’s speed relative to the
posted limit, oﬃcers can manipulate ﬁnes by writing down a slower speed than was observed
on the actual citation, resulting in a discounted ﬁne (Anbarci & Lee 2014; Goncalves &
Mello 2021). In Florida, the setting of our study, nearly one third of all speeding citations
1
are issued for exactly nine miles per hour (MPH) over the limit, just below a $75 increase
in the statutory ﬁne amount. Less than one percent are issued for either eight or ten MPH.
Oﬃcers patrolling the same beat-shifts vary considerably in the degree of bunching in their
charged speed distributions, highlighting that oﬃcer discretion, rather than driver behavior,
explains the bunching in cited speeds (Goncalves & Mello, 2021).
Our empirical approach leverages this variation across oﬃcers in the propensity to bunch
motorists below ﬁne increases.
We use an instrumental variables (IV) framework where
the treatment and outcome of interest are whether a driver receives a harsh (versus dis-
counted) ﬁne and whether a cited driver commits a new traﬃc oﬀense in the following year.
Our instrument is the citing oﬃcer’s propensity not to bunch other drivers, which we call
stringency. Our design mirrors a growing literature leveraging randomly assigned judges for
identiﬁcation (e.g., Kling 2006; Maestas et al. 2013; Dahl et al. 2014; Dobbie & Song 2015,
Mueller-Smith 2015), with the caveat that, in our setting, citing oﬃcers are not randomly
assigned to drivers. An important concern for our approach, then, is whether an oﬃcer’s
bunching propensity is correlated with the characteristics of her sample of cited drivers. We
show that, conditional on beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀects, stringency is uncorrelated with an oﬃcer’s
ticketing frequency, driver characteristics that predict reoﬀending, and past traﬃc oﬀending.
First, we use this IV framework to study the deterrence eﬀects of sanctions. We estimate
the local average treatment eﬀect (LATE) of harsher ﬁnes on the future driving behavior of
cited drivers, instrumenting harsh ﬁnes with oﬃcer stringency. We ﬁnd that a 125 dollar
increase in ﬁne amounts reduces the likelihood of any new traﬃc oﬀense in the following year
by 1.6 percentage points (󰂃= −0.07). We document a stronger eﬀect on speeding oﬀenses
(󰂃= −0.13) and a statistically signiﬁcant, but less precise, eﬀect on the likelihood that a
driver is involved in a traﬃc accident in the next year (󰂃= −0.04).
In this setting, motorists receiving harsh and lenient ﬁnes face identical sanctions for
future oﬀenses. Hence, the ex-post response we document represents a speciﬁc deterrence
eﬀect, or the impact of the experience of punishment on oﬀending (Nagin, 2013).
Our
ﬁne elasticity estimates advance a literature focused on isolating speciﬁc deterrence eﬀects
(Gehrsitz 2017; Hansen 2015, Dusek & Traxler 2021, Finlay et al. 2022) and the broader
literature on the deterrence eﬀects of traﬃc enforcement eﬀorts (e.g., Makowsky & Stratmann
2011; DeAngelo & Hansen 2014; Luca 2014; Traxler et al. 2018). Our ability to measure
individual-level impacts on crash involvement, an outcome clearly associated with social costs
and not subject to enforcement-based measurement, also adds to the literature on speciﬁc
deterrence.
Next, we quantify the overall contribution of oﬃcer discretion to public safety by esti-
mating the reoﬀending rate in a counterfactual scenario without oﬃcer discretion. Because
the speciﬁc type of discretion we study takes the form of oﬃcers departing from ﬁne rules by
2
reducing charges, our aim is to estimate the reoﬀending rate if all cited drivers were instead
issued harsh ﬁnes. The empirical challenge we face is that this counterfactual is not identiﬁed
by the LATE when treatment eﬀects are heterogeneous, especially if oﬃcers strategically use
their discretion. For example, suppose that oﬃcers allocate harsh ﬁnes to maximize public
safety. In this case, the motorists currently facing harsh ﬁnes should be the most responsive
to those harsh ﬁnes in terms of driving behavior, and the safety gains associated with issuing
harsh ﬁnes to those currently not receiving them could be much smaller than suggested by
the LATE. Note that this is a pervasive issue in the program evaluation literature, where ex-
trapolating beyond the LATE is an important step in assessing the eﬀects of counterfactual
policy changes (e.g., Heckman & Vytlacil 2007, Cornelissen et al. 2016, Brinch et al. 2017).
Hence, our desired counterfactual requires a dedicated estimate of the average treat-
ment eﬀect on the untreated (ATU). While this parameter can be recovered from estimates
of marginal treatment eﬀects (e.g., Bjorklund & Moﬃtt 1987; Heckman & Vytlacil 2007;
Mogstad & Torgovitsky 2018), identiﬁcation of the MTE requires a strict monotonicity
assumption, which implies that all oﬃcers share a common ranking of motorists when allo-
cating harsh sanctions. Instead, we estimate the ATU using a novel two-step procedure that
does not require any monotonicity assumptions. We ﬁrst extend our IV framework using
an identiﬁcation at inﬁnity approach (e.g., Heckman 1990; Hull 2020; Arnold et al. 2022).
Speciﬁcally, examining the reoﬀending rates of motorists cited by oﬃcers who always and
never issue harsh ﬁnes identiﬁes the average treated and untreated potential outcomes. We
use parametric extrapolation techniques as in Arnold et al. (2022), but our setting is unique
in that we actually observe oﬃcers in the tails of the stringency distribution. As such, our
extrapolation-based estimates of the average treated and untreated potential outcomes are
insensitive to functional form assumptions. We then combine these estimates of average
potential outcomes with observed reoﬀending rates in the data in the data to estimate the
average treatment eﬀect (ATE), average treatment eﬀect on the treated (ATT), and average
treatment eﬀect on the untreated (ATU).
Our approach indeed reveals important diﬀerences between the LATE and the ATU. We
ﬁnd that motorists who currently face lenient ﬁnes exhibit treatment eﬀects which are 40
percent larger (more negative) than the estimated LATE. Our estimated ATU implies that
the overall reoﬀending rate would decline by 2.2 percent in a counterfactual scenario without
oﬃcer discretion. To put this number in perspective, we estimate that switching all drivers
from lenient to harsh ﬁnes would reduce the reoﬀending rate by 3.4 percent. Eliminating
discretion thus achieves over sixty percent of the feasible deterrence on this margin.
The safety gains from removing oﬃcer discretion can be decomposed into two channels.
The ﬁrst, which we call the average component, is the safety gains associated with increasing
the likelihood of harsh ﬁnes for the average motorist. The second, which we call the sorting
3
component, is the relative safety gain from issuing harsh ﬁnes to the speciﬁc subgroup of
motorists who typically face lenience when oﬃcers exercise discretion. The second component
captures diﬀerences in treatment eﬀects for the average motorist (ATE) and the subset of
motorists whose treatment status is changed without discretion (ATU). We ﬁnd that each
channel explains about half of the overall safety gains from eliminating oﬃcer discretion.
In other words, increasing the harshness rate for the average driver improves safety, and
allocating harsh ﬁnes to motorists who typically receive lenience when oﬃcers use discretion
further reduces the reoﬀending rate, because these motorists are especially responsive to
harsh ﬁnes. Note that this is exactly the opposite of what would be expected under safety
maximization by oﬃcers, which would predict the smallest treatment eﬀects for the motorists
typically issued lenient ﬁnes.
We ﬁnd similar patterns when considering alternative measures of safety. Examining a
motorist’s number of new traﬃc oﬀenses in the following two years, those issued lenient ﬁnes
represent over 80 percent of the feasible deterrence. In terms of future crash involvement,
untreated motorists comprise nearly all the feasible deterrence. For this group of drivers,
we estimate that each additional dollar in ﬁnes issued from counterfactually imposing harsh
sanctions yields a public safety gain of nearly two dollars in the form of lower social costs
attributable to traﬃc accidents.
Finally, we consider potential explanations for the oﬃcer behavior we document. Along
with the reverse selection on gains discussed above, we ﬁnd striking positive selection on
levels: if issued a lenient ﬁne, the motorists who face harsh sanctions would reoﬀend about 15
percent more often than motorists who receive lenience. We ﬁnd that both reverse selection
on gains and selection on levels persist when examining patterns within motorist covariates
or focusing only on ﬁrst-time oﬀenders and cannot be explained by oﬃcer decisions based
on the underlying stopped speed. We also ﬁnd similar selection patterns when examining
experienced oﬃcers.
Hence, the available evidence is consistent with the view that the
current allocation of ﬁnes reﬂects the goals of oﬃcers. In particular, these patterns align
well with an intuitive notion of fairness, with oﬃcers allocating harsh ﬁnes to the “worst”
drivers in terms of recidivism risk. These motorists are the least deterred by harsh ﬁnes, and
hence eliminating these “sorting” decisions by oﬃcers has important public safety beneﬁts.
Our central contribution is to a large literature on the implications of bureaucratic dis-
cretion for state eﬀectiveness (e.g., Prendergast 2007; Ash & MacLeod 2015; Best et al.
2017; Bandiera et al. 2021) and to a rapidly growing literature on the role of discretion in
the criminal justice system (e.g., Weisburst 2017; Ba et al. 2021; Chalﬁn & Goncalves 2021;
Goncalves & Mello 2021; Abrams et al. 2021; Feigenberg & Miller 2022; Norris 2022; An-
gelova et al. 2023). We quantify the net eﬀect of oﬃcer discretion over sanctions on public
safety and show that a misalignment between the deterrence objectives of the state and the
4
discretionary behavior of police oﬃcers has important implications for road safety.
Our ﬁndings on this dimension also speak to a largely theoretical literature on fairness-
eﬃciency tradeoﬀs in the design of legal institutions (e.g, Polinsky & Shavell 2000; Kaplow &
Shavell 2006; O’Flaherty & Sethi 2019; Moore 2019) by documenting the empirical relevance
of a tradeoﬀbetween eﬃciency and other potential law enforcement objectives, such as the
targeting of sanctions to the “worst” oﬀenders. Importantly, we do not take a ﬁrm stand
on the overall welfare implications of this oﬃcer behavior, as this behavior could reﬂect a
legitimate law enforcement goal or the desired allocation of the state.
We also contribute to a broad literature on the allocation choices of economic agents. A
common practice in this literature is to examine selection patterns in settings where eﬃcient
allocations should exhibit selection on gains (e.g., Carneiro et al. 2011; Abaluck et al. 2016;
Van Dijk 2019; Chandra & Staiger 2020). Several such studies have nonetheless found sorting
based on levels, such as parents choosing school districts for their children (Abdulkadiroglu
et al., 2020) and hospitals opting into a Medicare reform (Einav et al., 2022). We document
similar behavior in a new setting, law enforcement, and we do so using a novel method that
can characterize selection patterns under minimal assumptions.
Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our data and setting. We lay out
our empirical framework in section 3 and estimate the causal eﬀect of sanctions in section
4. Section 5 quantiﬁes and decomposes the net contribution of oﬃcer discretion to public
safety and section 6 considers potential explanations for the oﬃcer behavior we ﬁnd. Section
7 concludes.
2
Data and setting
2.1
Data sources
The Florida Clerks and Comptrollers provided administrative records of the universe of
traﬃc citations issued in Florida for the years 2005–2018 from Florida’s Uniform Traﬃc
Citation (UTC) database. These records include the date and county of the citation as
well as information on the cited violation. When the violation is speeding, this information
includes the charged speed and posted speed limit (e.g., 74 MPH in a 65 MPH zone). The
UTC data also include all information provided on a stopped motorist’s driver license (DL):
name, date of birth, address, race, gender, as well as DL state and number.
Using the
driver license number, we are able to link drivers across citations and construct our primary
measures of past and future traﬃc oﬀending.
We augment the motorist information in the UTC data with four auxiliary data sources.
First, we match drivers on zip code of residence to estimated per-capita income at the zip
code level from the IRS Statistics of Income ﬁles. Second, we construct estimated vehicle
5
values based on a database of online vehicle resale values. Third, we recode a motorist’s race
as Hispanic if, based on census records, their surname is associated with Hispanic status for
more than 80 percent of individuals.1 Finally, we link drivers on full name and date of birth
to prison spell records from the Florida Department of Corrections to construct a measure
of prior incarceration.
In the citations data, the ticketing oﬃcer is identiﬁed by name. We construct a consistent
oﬃcer identiﬁer by linking the oﬃcer name with data on Florida Highway Patrol (FHP)
employment spells provided by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement. We focus on
tickets issued by the FHP both because we can more consistently the citing oﬃcer and
because speeding enforcement is a central duty of the FHP. However, we measure past and
future oﬀending using all citations, not just the FHP-issued citations in our focal sample.
We also obtained administrative crash reports covering the universe of automobile ac-
cidents known to police over the period 2006–2018 from the Florida Department of Trans-
portation (FDOT). These data are collected during a police response or investigation and
include the date and county of the incident and include the DL numbers of involved drivers,
which we use to link drivers with the citations data.
The Florida Clerks and Comptrollers provided records from the Traﬃc Citation Account-
ing Transition System (TCATS) database, which includes information on the traﬃc court
disposition associated with about 80 percent of the citations in our sample. We use these
records to construct a measure of whether a citation was contested in traﬃc court and, based
on the disposition, to construct measures of accrued, rather than statutory, sanctions. For
additional details, see appendix D.
2.2
Sample construction
To construct our sample of focal citations, we ﬁrst restrict attention to tickets written by the
Florida Highway Patrol over 2007–2016 where the citing oﬃcer is identiﬁed.2 We further re-
strict the sample to include tickets where speeding is the only violation, no crash is indicated,
and the charged speed is between nine and twenty-nine miles per hour over the posted speed
limit. We choose twenty-nine as our upper limit because (i) the available evidence suggests
that motorists are still bunched with positive probability when their true speed is as high
1As discussed in Goncalves & Mello (2021), there are clear inconsistencies in the recording of
Hispanic status in the UTC data. Oﬃcers frequently write down race = H (for Hispanic). But
in Miami-Dade county, where the population is over 60 percent Hispanic, less than one percent of
citations are coded as being issued to a Hispanic motorist.
2We focus on 2007–2016 so that we can measure other oﬀending (including crash activity) for
least one full year prior and one full year after the focal citation. Over this period, the ticketing
oﬃcer is identiﬁable for 85 percent of FHP-issued speeding tickets.
6
as twenty-nine MPH over the limit (see ﬁgure 1) and (ii) thirty MPH over the limit is the
threshold for criminal speeding.
We also restrict to drivers with a valid Florida driver license number, so that we can
reliably measure past and future oﬀending, and require that oﬃcers have at least ﬁfty cita-
tions meeting the above criteria to compute our instrument. Ultimately, our focal sample
is comprised of 1,693,457 speeding citations issued by 1,960 FHP oﬃcers. There are 1.4M
unique drivers in the sample. Table 1 presents summary statistics.
Again, reoﬀending and past oﬀending are measured using all citations issued in the state
rather than just the citations that comprise our sample of focal FHP tickets. Worth noting
here is the fact that our main outcome measure will capture whether a motorist is caught
and ticketed for a new traﬃc oﬀense, which itself could be subject to oﬃcer discretion. If
anything, we expect that oﬃcer discretion at the recidivism stage will bias our speciﬁc deter-
rence eﬀect estimates towards zero. We compare reoﬀending rates for individuals (randomly)
receiving harsh and lenient ﬁnes and ﬁnd that those receiving harsh ﬁnes diﬀerentially re-
duce their oﬀending rates. If oﬃcers are more likely to let drivers with less severe oﬀending
histories oﬀwith formal or informal warnings, that would bias our estimates towards zero
by deﬂating the reoﬀending rates of those who are issued lenient sanctions.
2.3
Florida highway patrol
State-level patrols are the primary enforcers of traﬃc laws on interstates and many highways,
especially those in unincorporated areas. On patrol, oﬃcers are given an assigned zone over
which they can combine roving patrol and parked observation patrol. Florida Highway Patrol
(FHP) oﬃcers are divided into one of nine assigned troops, almost all of which patrol six to
eight counties each. Oﬃcer assignments operate on eight-hour shifts and cover an assignment
region that roughly corresponds to a county, though the size of a “beat” can vary based on
an area’s population density. In practice, we use counties to proxy for assignment regions.
The FHP is comprised of approximately 1,500 full-time oﬃcers. Speeding enforcement is
a primary duty of FHP oﬃcers and the FHP collectively issues between 150,000 and 200,000
speeding citations each year. Other responsibilities include enforcing a wide array of other
traﬃc laws, investigating crashes, and responding to and assisting with highway emergencies.
The FHP oﬃcer handbook reads “Members should take the enforcement action they deem
necessary to ensure the safety of the motoring public, reduce the number and severity of
traﬃc crashes, and reduce the number of criminal acts committed on highways of this state,”
highlighting that oﬃcers are explicitly given discretion over enforcement decisions.
In Florida, speeding sanctions are based on an oﬀender’s speed relative to the posted
speed limit. Speeding 1-5 MPH over the limit carries a statutory warning but no sanctions,
7
while speeding 30 or more MPH over the limit is a misdemeanor oﬀense requiring the oﬀender
to appear in court. Between 6 and 29 MPH over the limit, the statutory ﬁne is a step function,
plotted as a red dotted line in ﬁgure 1.
Speeding oﬀenses are also associated with “points” on an oﬀender’s driver license (DL).
Point assessments are also based on speed; speeding 6-15 MPH over the limit is associated
with 3 points while speeding 16+ MPH over the limit is associated with 4 points. Points
are used by car insurers to adjust premiums and oﬀenders that collect a suﬃcient number of
points (12 points in 12 months; 18 points in 18 months; 24 points in 36 months) have their
license suspended for 30 days (6 months; 1 year).
After a citation has been issued, a driver can either submit payment to the county clerk
or request a court date to contest the ticket. If the ticket goes to court, a judge or hearing
oﬃcer typically decides either to uphold the original charge, reduce the charge, or dismiss
the citation. At the time of payment, a subset of drivers can elect to attend an optional
traﬃc school, completion of which combined with on-time payment will remove the citation
from a driver’s record and prevent the accrual of the associated DL points.
2.4
Discretion over sanctions
Panel (a) of ﬁgure 1 shows the speeding ﬁne schedule in Florida and a histogram of charged
speeds on FHP-issued speeding citations. Over one third of all citations are issued for exactly
9 MPH over the posted limit, just below a $75 increase in the associated ﬁne. Less than
one percent of all citations are issued for eight or ten MPH over the limit. The dramatic
bunching in the speed distribution suggests systematic manipulation by oﬃcers. Speciﬁcally,
the distribution implies the practice of speed discounting, where oﬃcers observe drivers
traveling at higher speeds but write down nine MPH on the citation as a form of lenience
(Anbarci & Lee 2014; Goncalves & Mello 2021). An oﬃcer’s decision whether to bunch a
driver, resulting in either a discounted or full ﬁne, is the focus of our study.
We rely on several pieces of evidence to demonstrate that bunching in the speed distri-
bution is generated by the behavior of oﬃcers rather than drivers (e.g., Traxler et al. 2018).
First, following Goncalves & Mello (2021), ﬁgure 1 shows that all bunching is attributable
to a subset of lenient oﬃcers.3 About 25 percent of oﬃcers, whom we term the non-lenient
oﬃcers, almost never write tickets for nine MPH. In appendix A, we further document the
variation across oﬃcers in bunching propensity, show that an oﬃcer’s bunching propensity
3See appendix D-2 for details on the classiﬁcation of oﬃcers as lenient versus non-lenient, which
is based on the manipulation test from Frandsen (2017). To ensure that the pattern in ﬁgure 1
is not mechanical and to avoid the reﬂection problem in IV estimates, we randomly partition an
oﬃcer’s stops into two groups, classify each oﬃcer × partition as lenient versus not, and then use
the oﬃcer’s classiﬁcation in the other partition.
8
is strongly correlated across space and time, and ﬁnd that the identity of the stopping oﬃcer
is signiﬁcantly more predictive of a bunched ticket than locations or motorist characteristics.
A natural question here is why do oﬃcers bunch drivers? First, we note that ﬁne revenue
is routed to the county government where the citation was issued. Hence, neither the oﬃcers
themselves, nor the FHP or state government, have any ﬁnancial stake in ﬁne amounts.
Oﬃcers may have a promotion incentive to write a certain number of tickets, as the number
of tickets they write appears on their performance evaluations.
We believe these set of
institutional factors contribute to an environment in which oﬃcers are encouraged to write
tickets but also have the freedom to write reduced charges, which is ideal for our research
design (Goncalves & Mello, 2021).
Based on the available evidence, our view is that distaste for traﬃc court best explains
oﬃcer lenience in this context.
After receiving a traﬃc ticket, the cited driver has the
option to contest the citation in traﬃc court, with the citing oﬃcer expected to attend the
associated court hearing. Using the same identiﬁcation strategy that we exploit to assess the
causal eﬀect of sanctions on oﬀending, we ﬁnd that a 125 dollar increase in ﬁne (causally)
increases the likelihood that a driver contests a ticket in court by about 40 percent (see table
2). Hence, distaste for appearing in traﬃc court generates an incentive to bunch drivers and
heterogeneity in distaste for traﬃc court could explain the observed variation in lenience
across oﬃcers.
3
Empirical framework
Our empirical approach leverages the variation across oﬃcers in the propensity to bunch
drivers within an instrumental variables framework. The outcome of interest, Yi, is whether
cited driver i commits a new traﬃc oﬀense in the following year. The treatment of interest
is whether driver i receives a harsh ﬁne (as opposed to a lenient one), which we denote by
Di = 1[speedi ≥10]. The instrument, which we call oﬃcer stringency, is computed as:
Zij = 1 −
󰀣
1
Nj −1
󰁛
k∕=i
1[speedkj = 9]
󰀤
≡stringency
where i indexes motorists and j indexes oﬃcers. In words, Di is an indicator for whether a
motorist is not bunched at 9 MPH over and Zij is the fraction of oﬃcer j’s citations issued
to all other drivers that are for speeds of 10 MPH or more over the limit; or in other words,
the fraction of citations that are not bunched at 9 MPH.
To adjust for diﬀerential exposure of oﬃcers to groups of motorists based on patrol
shift assignments, we condition on detailed beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀects, denoted by ψs, in all
our analyses. These beat-shift eﬀects are at the level of the county × 1[highway] × year
9
× month × 1[weekend] × shift. A county is approximately a patrol area for each oﬃcer.
Oﬃcers rotates shift (day of week and time of day) monthly.
Our empirical framework requires that the stringency instrument satisfy the local average
treatment eﬀect (LATE) assumptions of Imbens & Angrist (1994):
1. Relevance. D(Z) is a nontrivial function of Z.
2. Exogeneity. {Yi1, Yi0, Di(Z)} ⊥Z | ψ
3. Exclusion. Yi(D, Z) = Yi(D)
4. Monotonicity. ∀w, j ∈J, either Di(w) ≥Di(h) ∀i or Di(w) ≤Di(h) ∀i
where J denotes the set of oﬃcers and {Yi1, Yi0} are the potential outcomes of driver i when
sanctioned harshly (D = 1) and leniently (D = 0).
The relevance assumption requires a statistical relationship between stringency and harsh
ﬁnes, which is empirically testable. Panel (c) of ﬁgure 2 plots the probability of harsh ﬁnes
against oﬃcer stringency, conditional on beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀects, laid over a histogram of
stringency, net of beat-shift eﬀects. The ﬁgure documents a linear and statistically precise
relationship, with an estimated ﬁrst stage coeﬃcient of ˆβ = 0.944 (se = 0.006) and associated
F ≈22, 000. In ﬁgure A-3, we show the ﬁrst stage estimates for other sanction measures. In
terms of ﬁne amounts, shown in panel (a), the estimated ﬁrst stage is ˆβ = $122. We further
discuss the exogeneity, exclusion, and monotonicity assumptions in turn below.
Exogeneity. Existing studies using examiner designs (e.g., Kling 2006, Dobbie & Song
2015, Maestas et al. 2013, Bhuller et al. 2020) have appealed to the institutional quasi-
random assignment of examiners (e.g., bail judges) to satisfy the exogeneity assumption.
Citing oﬃcers in our setting are, of course, not randomly assigned to drivers.
Instead,
oﬃcers can select their own samples by choosing (i) whom to pull over versus whom to let
pass and (ii) whom to cite versus whom to issue a formal or informal warning. We cannot
observe formal or informal warnings in our data and cannot observe the full population of
drivers passing by an oﬃcer during a given shift.
An especially salient threat to our empirical design would be a correlation between strin-
gency on the citing margin (whom to cite versus not) and the charging margin (whom to
bunch versus not). To help illustrate this point, suppose there were two oﬃcers, j ∈{a, b},
with a an oﬃcer who bunches most drivers and b an oﬃcer who bunches fewer drivers. Sup-
pose that a is also very lenient on the citing margin; that is, she lets most motorists pass
with no citation, while b is very stringent on the ticketing margin, citing most drivers. If a
restricts her sample by only citing “worse” drivers, then E(Yi0 | j = a) > E(Yi0 | j = b),
violating exogeneity.
10
There are two testable implications of the hypothesis that lenience on the intensive (bunch
versus not) and extensive (ticket versus not) margins are correlated. First, our instrument
Z should be correlated with an oﬃcer’s citation frequency. Holding constant the supply of
oﬀenders, oﬃcers with higher ticketing thresholds should have “missing” tickets relative to
oﬃcers with lower ticketing thresholds. Second, Z should be correlated with driver charac-
teristics that predict reoﬀending. We test both these predictions in ﬁgure 2. Panel (a) plots
the relationship between oﬃcer stringency and an oﬃcer’s average monthly citations, both
adjusted for beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀects. For both all citations and speeding citations, regres-
sion coeﬃcients are quantitatively small and statistically indistinguishable from zero. Panel
(b) illustrates that there is no relationship between stringency and either past oﬀending or
predicted reoﬀending based on driver covariates.4
Hence, the evidence suggests that exogeneity violations generated by sample selection are
unlikely. Nonetheless, we take sample selection concerns seriously and subject our treatment
eﬀect estimates to a series of associated robustness checks, described further in section 4.
Exclusion. The exclusion restriction requires that oﬃcer stringency aﬀects future of-
fending only through sanctions. Note that our strategy allows other (non-sanction) oﬃcer
behaviors to aﬀect drivers as long as those behaviors are uncorrelated with our stringency
measure (Frandsen et al., 2019). On the other hand, features of the oﬃcer-driver interaction
other than the sanction that cause a driver to change behavior would violate exclusion if
those features are correlated with stringency.
Another plausible source of exclusion violations is downstream involvement in the traﬃc
court system. As previously mentioned, stringency increases the likelihood that a driver
contests a ticket in court and might inﬂuence traﬃc school elections. If anything about the
court experience changes driver behavior, that could be considered an exclusion violation.
However, whether traﬃc court involvement constitutes a violation of exclusion or simply a
mechanism for the ﬁne’s impact is subject to interpretation. When viewed from the oﬃcer’s
perspective, downstream events that are (i) caused by harsher sanctions and (ii) reduce
reoﬀending still could be interpreted as a causal eﬀect of sanctions themselves.5
Finally, the choice to bunch a driver indirectly aﬀects the statutory “points” a driver
4Appendix table A-2 shows the relationship between all driver characteristics and recidivism,
charged ﬁnes, and oﬃcer stringency. Driver covariates have substantial joint predictive power over
reoﬀending (F = 1734) and reduced charges (F = 29), but considerably less power to predict
oﬃcer stringency (F = 2.7). While our test rejects the null hypothesis of no statistical relationship
between observables and oﬃcer stringency, a joint F = 2.7 is remarkable small in a setting without
institutional random assignment and N ≈1.7M.
5Moreover, the evidence is largely inconsistent with the court system playing an important role
in generating the treatment eﬀects. As shown in ﬁgure B-4, treatment eﬀects are very similar for
local and non-local drivers. Because drivers need to travel to the citation county to attend court,
local drivers are more likely to contest citations.
11
receives on their license, as discussed in section 2.3. Appendix ﬁgure A-3 illustrates that
oﬃcer stringency slightly aﬀects statutory points (βFS = 0.7). However, drivers can mitigate
their point exposure through the court system, and we ﬁnd that, taking into account those
downstream behaviors, there is almost no relationship between stringency and points, again
shown in ﬁgure A-3. Hence, the burden of accrued license points cannot explain the eﬀects
we observe.
Monotonicity. Monotonicity violations are a natural concern in our setting given evi-
dence of racial bias in oﬃcer leniency decisions (e.g., Goncalves & Mello 2021). Importantly,
Frandsen et al. (2019) show that 2SLS estimates in examiner designs recover the appropriate
local average treatment eﬀect under a weaker average monotonicity condition, which requires
only that counterfactual reassignment to a more stringent oﬃcer increases the probability of
harsh sanctions in expectation. In table A-3, we provide evidence for average monotonicity
by showing that the ﬁrst stage is statistically strong and similar in magnitude across motorist
subsamples.6
To assess the overall impact of discretion, we estimate a set of treatment eﬀect parameters
beyond the LATE. Our method for recovering these parameters, described in section 5, does
not rely on a monotonicity assumption.
4
Deterrence eﬀects
Given our interest in the safety implications of discretion, characterizing the average causal
eﬀect of sanctions on motorist behavior is an important ﬁrst step in our analysis.
Our
approach follows directly from the empirical framework discussed above. We estimate the
regression Yijs = βDij +ψs+uijs by two-stage least squares, instrumenting for Di with oﬃcer
stringency Zij. Given the assumptions discussed in section 3, our deterrence IV estimate
will recover a local average treatment eﬀect (LATE), which is a positive weighted average of
treatment eﬀects for individuals whose treatment status is shifted by the instrument (Imbens
& Angrist, 1994).
Note that our stringency instrument solves an important identiﬁcation challenge arising
from the nonrandom assignment of punishments. Not only do statutory sanctions increase
with oﬀense severity, as shown in ﬁgure 1, but oﬃcers further manipulate ﬁnes, as discussed
in section 2.4. Naive OLS estimates, presented in table B-1, illustrate both dimensions of
the identiﬁcation challenge well. A regression of one-year reoﬀending on the charged ﬁne
(in $100’s) and beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀects gives ˆβ = 0.043 (se = 0.002), suggesting that harsher
ﬁnes increase reoﬀending. Adding oﬃcer ﬁxed eﬀects increases the estimate to ˆβ = 0.055
(se = 0.002), highlighting the nonrandom sorting of motorists into sanctions by oﬃcers.
6See appendix B-1 for additional discussion of monotonicity concerns.
12
4.1
Results
In ﬁgure 3, we show the dynamic relationship between oﬃcer stringency and traﬃc oﬀending.
Speciﬁcally, we plot estimated coeﬃcients (and conﬁdence bands) from regressions of the
form:
Yijsτ = βτZij + ψs + uijs
where Yijsτ is an indicator for whether driver i receives a traﬃc citation in quarter τ, which
are quarters relative to the focal FHP citation. In the ﬁgure, τ = 0 corresponds to the
exact date of the focal FHP citation and τ = k corresponds to k quarters before or after
the focal citation. The ﬁgure illustrates that the stringency of the citing oﬃcer at τ = 0 has
no ability to predict oﬀending over the previous eight quarters but predicts a stark decline
oﬀending immediately after the focal citation. Impacts persist over the ﬁrst four quarters
and fade out thereafter. Over the year following the focal citation, the reduced form estimate
is ˆβ = −0.017 (se = 0.005).
Table 2 presents 2SLS estimates for the full set of one-year oﬀending outcomes.7 Column
1 reports the lenient oﬃcer mean of the outcome, while columns 2 and 3 report IV estimates
excluding and including controls for driver characteristics. To help interpret magnitudes,
column 4 reports the implied ﬁne elasticity, which is computed by regressing the outcome on
the (continuous) ﬁne amount, driver controls, and beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀects, instrumenting the
ﬁne amount with stringency, and then scaling the IV estimate by the ratio of the average
ﬁne and average reoﬀending rates.
We ﬁnd that harsh ﬁnes reduce the likelihood of a new traﬃc oﬀense in the following year
by about 1.6 percentage points (󰂃= −0.07). The majority of this eﬀect is attributable to
reductions in speeding oﬀenses; a harsh ﬁne reduces the likelihood of a new speeding oﬀense
in the next year by about 1.4 percentage points. The 2SLS estimate is precisely estimated,
with a 95 conﬁdence interval of (−0.017, −0.012). Our point estimate for speeding oﬀenses
represents an 8.5 percent decline relative to the lenient oﬃcer mean and implies a ﬁne
elasticity of −0.13. In other words, our estimate implies that a doubling of the ﬁne amount
would reduce the likelihood of speeding recidivism by 13 percent.
Estimated impacts of harsh ﬁnes on non-speeding oﬀenses are also statistically signiﬁcant
but less pronounced (󰂃= −0.06). The ﬁnding that speeding sanctions reduce other traﬃc
oﬀenses is consistent with Gehrsitz (2017), who ﬁnds speciﬁc deterrence eﬀects of short-term
license suspensions imposed on speeders in Germany on all forms of traﬃc oﬀending.
Consistent with reductions in traﬃc oﬀending implying a true behavioral response on
7In the appendix, we present graphical versions of the reduced form estimates (ﬁgure B-1),
dynamic versions of the reduced form for other outcomes (ﬁgure B-2), and the full set of ﬁrst stage
and reduced form estimates with and without controls (table B-2).
13
the part of drivers, we also ﬁnd that harsh ﬁnes reduces the likelihood of crash involvement
over the following year by between 0.2 and 0.3 percentage points (󰂃= −0.04). While less
precisely estimated than the eﬀects on traﬃc oﬀenses, the IV estimates for crash involvement
are statistically signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level.
Finally, following our discussion in section 2.4, the last row of table 2 reports IV estimates
of the impact of harsh ﬁnes on the likelihood that a driver contests a ticket in court. Relative
to a lenient oﬃcer mean of 0.26, we ﬁnd that a harsh ﬁne increases the likelihood of a
contested citation by about 11 percentage points, or about 42 percent, consistent with our
hypothesis that court aversion motivates oﬃcer lenience.
4.2
Robustness
In the appendix, we present results from a battery of robustness checks. Table B-3 shows that
estimated deterrence impacts are robust to alternative methods for computing the stringency
instrument.
Figure B-3 illustrates that our ﬁndings cannot be explained by diﬀerential
selection of motorists across oﬃcers. We also show that results are similar when further
interacting our beat-shift eﬀects with stretch-of-road ﬁxed eﬀects, constructed by mapping
the subset of geocoded tickets (N = 244, 858) to Florida roads. In section B-1, we discuss
additional robustness tests to address concerns about monotonicity.
4.3
Interpretation
As highlighted in section 2, motorists issued harsh and lenient ﬁnes face the same sanctions
for future oﬀenses. Hence, our estimates capture a pure speciﬁc deterrence eﬀect (e.g., Nagin
2013), or a behavioral responses to the experience of punishment, rather than the eﬀects of
statutorily higher sanctions for future oﬀenses.
In ﬁgure B-4, we show that treatment eﬀects are similar for local residents and out-of-
county drivers, suggesting a minimal role for the traﬃc court system in explaining treatment
eﬀects, since drivers need to travel to the citation county to attend traﬃc court. Figure B-4
also illustrates that oﬀending responses are nearly identical for motorists with higher and
lower incomes, proxied by the zip code of residence, which runs counter to a ﬁnancial distress
mechanism based on Mello (2021).
A mechanism that seems particularly consistent with the dynamic patterns in ﬁgure 3
is drivers updating their beliefs about sanctions (Dusek & Traxler, 2021). In ﬁgure B-5,
we show that oﬀending responses are stronger in the county of the focal ticket and larger
for motorists that have been exposed to stringent oﬃcers in the past, both of which are
consistent with a learning hypothesis.
14
5
The impact of discretion
Having shown that oﬃcer’s discretionary choices of sanctions matter for public safety by
estimating the local average treatment eﬀect of harsher ﬁnes on reoﬀending, we now examine
the overall implications of oﬃcer discretion over sanctions for public safety. Our approach is
to compare the observed reoﬀending rates with reoﬀending rates in a counterfactual scenario
without oﬃcer discretion. In other words, our aim is to identify reoﬀending rates were all
motorists issued harsh ﬁnes. This counterfactual reoﬀending rate is identiﬁed by an estimate
of the average treatment eﬀect for motorists currently issued lenient ﬁnes.
Our strategy for estimating average treatment eﬀects for treated and untreated motorists
again exploits across-oﬃcer variation in stringency and proceeds in two steps. First, we
rely on an identiﬁcation at inﬁnity approach to identify the average treated and untreated
potential outcomes for the entire sample of cited motorists.
Second, we combine these
estimates with the observed reoﬀending outcomes for treated and untreated motorists to
identify average treatment eﬀects on the treated (ATT) and untreated (ATU).
5.1
Estimating treated and untreated potential outcomes
To build intuition for our ﬁrst step, consider a supremely stringent oﬃcer j who always
issues harsh ﬁnes, Zij = 1.
Motorists cited by such an oﬃcer always receive the harsh
ﬁne, Dij = 1.
Hence, the observed reoﬀending rates for motorists stopped by oﬃcer j
represent the average treated potential outcomes for that subset of motorists, E(Yi|J = j) =
E(Yi1|J = j). Assuming that oﬃcers are as-good-as-randomly assigned, the average treated
potential outcomes for this group of motorists are the same as those for the entire sample
of motorists, E(Yi1|J = j) = E(Yi1). By the same logic, the outcomes of motorists stopped
by a supremely lenient oﬃcer with Zij = 0 can identify E(Yi0). This reasoning follows Hull
(2020) and Arnold et al. (2022) and is in the spirit of identiﬁcation at inﬁnity in selection
models (e.g., Chamberlain 1986; Heckman 1990; Andrews & Schafgans 1998).
In terms of implementing this idea in practice, we face two relevant issues. First, although
our data indeed include supremely stringent and lenient oﬃcers who always and never issue
harsh ﬁnes (as shown in panel a of ﬁgure A-1), our sample size is greatly reduced when
focusing only on these extreme oﬃcers. In particular, only 1,245 citations, or 0.07 percent
of our sample, are issued by supremely lenient oﬃcers. Hence, as our baseline approach,
we follow Arnold et al. (2022) and rely on extrapolation from the data away from the tails,
described further below.
The second practical issue is that as-good-as-random assignment of oﬃcers holds only
within beat-shifts, ψs, and hence, only within-ψ variation should be used for extrapolation.
Our baseline approach is to simply include these ﬁxed eﬀects in our extrapolation regressions.
15
In other words, we estimate regressions of the form:
E(Yi|Zij, ψs) = αψs + f(Zij) + uijs
(1)
and then compute the conditional expectation at the values Zij = 0 and Zij = 1 at the
average value of the beat-shift eﬀects, E(Yi0) = ˆα ¯ψi + f(0) and E(Yi1) = ˆα ¯ψi + f(1). Below,
we consider various functional forms for f(·), including polynomials, splines, and a fully non-
parametric speciﬁcation that relies only on the (ψ-adjusted) average outcomes for oﬃcers
with Zij < 0.01 and Z > 0.99 to estimate E(Yi0) and E(Yi1).
Including the beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀects in this way requires an auxiliary linearity assump-
tion, discussed in detail in Arnold et al. (2022).
As robustness, we consider alternative
approaches to adjusting our extrapolation estimates for diﬀerences across beat-shifts. First,
we estimate the above regression separately by troop, and then aggregate up the troop-level
estimates. We also estimate a version of the extrapolation based on the within-locations
approach of Feigenberg & Miller (2022), described further in section E-1. Both approaches
directly address the concern that our estimates of E(Yi0) and E(Yi1) are identiﬁed oﬀoﬃcers
patrolling diﬀerent beats by relying only on comparisons between oﬃcers patrolling the same
locations to estimate both.
5.2
Recovering treatment eﬀect parameters
After identifying average potential outcomes, our second step notes that the potential out-
comes of treated and untreated groups must average to the sample-wide average potential
outcomes. For the average treated outcome,
E(Yi1) = pE(Yi1|Di = 1) + (1 −p)E(Yi1|Di = 0)
= pE(Yi|Di = 1) + (1 −p)E(Yi1|Di = 0)
We estimate the left-hand side via extrapolation in the ﬁrst step. The ﬁrst term on the
right-hand side can be estimated directly from the data. Rearranging gives an expression for
the ﬁnal term, the treated outcome for untreated motorists, E(Yi1|Di = 0) =
1
1−pE(Yi1) −
p
1−pE(Yi|Di = 1). Combined with the observed outcomes for untreated motorists, we can
identify the average treatment eﬀect on the untreated:
ATU =E(Yi1|Di = 0) −E(Yi0|Di = 0)
=
1
1 −pE(Yi1) −
p
1 −pE(Yi|Di = 1) −E(Yi|Di = 0)
=
1
1 −p[E(Yi1) −E(Yi)]
(2)
16
where the last equation uses the identity pE(Yi|Di = 1) + (1 −p)E(Yi|Di = 0) = E(Yi).
The ﬁnal equation provides useful intuition for how we identify the ATU. Once we have
estimated the average treated potential outcome, the diﬀerence between that value and
the observed average reoﬀending outcome E(Yi) reﬂects the diﬀerence in outcomes due to
individuals who have not been treated, and the division by (1 −p) scales this diﬀerence for
the share of individuals who are untreated.
By the same logic, we can identify the untreated potential outcome for treated drivers
from the relationship E(Yi0|Di = 1) = 1
pE(Yi0)−1−p
p E(Yi|Di = 0), which gives us the average
treatment eﬀect on the treated,
ATT =E(Yi1|Di = 1) −E(Yi0|Di = 1)
=E(Yi|Di = 1) −1
pE(Yi0) + 1 −p
p
E(Yi|Di = 0)
=1
p[E(Yi) −E(Yi0)]
(3)
Again, the ﬁnal equation makes clear how the ATT is identiﬁed. The diﬀerence between
the average reoﬀending rate and the untreated potential outcome reﬂects the diﬀerence in
outcomes due to individuals who have been treated, and the division by p scales this diﬀerence
for the share of individuals who are treated.
To compute standard errors, we rely on a Bayesian bootstrap (Rubin, 1981), clustering at
the oﬃcer-level and bootstrapping the entire procedure (both steps). The Bayesian bootstrap
is a special case of the standard bootstrap procedure, where instead of resampling with
replacement, random weights are drawn in each iteration. This procedure has the advantage
of preserving support of the stringency instrument and the beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀects in each
iteration.
Notice that, while our procedure for recovering treatment eﬀect parameters of interest
continues to rely on the assumptions of oﬃcer instrument relevance, exogeneity, and exclu-
sion discussed in section 3, our approach does not require making a monotonicity assumption
about the treatment behavior of oﬃcers. In that sense, our estimation of the ATE, ATT, and
ATU requires fewer assumptions than were needed to recover the LATE above. Implemen-
tation of the extrapolation procedure for estimating the sample average potential outcomes
requires specifying a functional form for the conditional expectation function, E(Y |Z, ψ),
but our setting permits nonparametric speciﬁcations, and none of the conclusions we discuss
below are sensitive to functional form assumptions.
17
5.3
Extrapolation results
Panel (a) of ﬁgure 4 illustrates our extrapolation-based estimation of the sample average
potential outcomes.
The ﬁgure plots the probability of reoﬀending on the vertical axis
against oﬃcer stringency on the horizontal axis. We show both a nonparametric binscatter,
adjusted for beat-shift eﬀects using the method of Cattaneo et al. (2021), as well as the
ﬁtted line from an estimate of equation 1. We begin with a simple quadratic speciﬁcation,
which ﬁts the data quite well, especially in the tails of the stringency distribution, and
discuss sensitivity to functional form assumptions below. The value of the quadratic ﬁt at
Z = 0 and Z = 1 provide estimates of the average potential outcomes, E(Yi0) = 0.355 and
E(Yi1) = 0.343, as well as an estimate of the average treatment eﬀect, −0.012.
In panel (b) of ﬁgure 4, we present our estimates of the ATT and ATU, which are
obtained by combining our extrapolation estimates of E(Yi0) and E(Yi1) with treatment-
speciﬁc observed outcomes, as described above. The vertical axis plots, for each group of
motorists, the untreated potential outcome, E(Yi0), which we refer to as the “reoﬀending
rate,” as well each group’s treatment eﬀect, E(Yi1−Yi0). Although treated motorists reoﬀend
at the highest rates, E(Yi0|Di = 1) = 0.371, they exhibit small and statistically insigniﬁcant
treatment eﬀects, E(Yi1 −Yi0|Di = 1) = −0.006 (se = 0.007). On the other hand, untreated
motorists reoﬀend signiﬁcantly less often, E(Yi0|Di = 0) = 0.325 and exhibit sizable and
statistically signiﬁcant treatment eﬀects, E(Yi1 −Yi0|Di = 0) = −0.023 (se = 0.009). To
summarize, we ﬁnd positive selection on levels and reverse selection on gains: relative to
untreated motorists, treated individuals reoﬀend more often but are less responsive to harsh
ﬁnes.
Notice that the treatment eﬀect for currently untreated motorists is about twice as large
(more negative) as the ATE and forty percent larger than the LATE estimate from section 4,
highlighting the importance of our approach for assessing the overall impacts of discretion.
Relative to the untreated (potential) reoﬀending levels, untreated motorists reduce their
reoﬀending by 7.1 percent when issued harsh ﬁnes, whereas the comparable ﬁgures for the
average motorist and treated motorists are 3.4 percent and 1.6 percent, respectively.
Given the speciﬁc feature of our setting, where oﬃcers deviate from ﬁne rules by giving
breaks to a subset of motorists, the ATU identiﬁes the impact of removing oﬃcer discretion
over sanctions. Currently, the probability of a harsh ﬁne is p = E(Di) = 0.657 and the
reoﬀending rate is E(Yi) = 0.351. Without discretion, the probability of a harsh ﬁne would
become one and the reoﬀending rate would decline by (1−p)·ATU = 0.78 percentage points,
or about 2.2 percent. In a typical year in our data (N = 172, 000 citations), this corresponds
to about 4,000 additional traﬃc oﬀenses attributable to oﬃcer discretion. Note that these
are additional oﬀenses due to just one margin of discretion in one police department. We
18
discuss some alternative interpretations of this magnitude below.
5.4
Decomposing safety gains
Conceptually, we can think of safety gains from eliminating discretion as working through
two distinct channels.
The removal of discretion increases the share of harsh ﬁnes from
p = 0.657 to p = 1, which we would expect to reduce reoﬀending based on our analyses in
section 4, but also changes which drivers face harsh ﬁnes. A simple decomposition based
on estimated treatment eﬀect parameters can shed light on the quantitative importance of
these two channels.
Speciﬁcally, the net safety gain from eliminating discretion is given by:
∆Y
= (1 −p) · ATU
= (1 −p) · ATE
󰁿
󰁾󰁽
󰂀
average
+ (1 −p) · (ATU −ATE)
󰁿
󰁾󰁽
󰂀
sorting
The ﬁrst term captures the safety gains from increasing the likelihood that the average
motorist faces harsh ﬁnes, which we call the average component. The second term captures
additional safety gains (or losses) attributable to the diﬀerences in treatment eﬀects for the
average motorist and currently untreated motorists, which we call the sorting component.
The sorting component equals zero if the ATT and ATU are equal. This would be the case
with homogeneous treatment eﬀects or if, for example, oﬃcers randomized motorists into
sanctions. With selection on gains, the average and sorting components are opposite-signed.
The realized safety gain from eliminating discretion is less than would be predicted by the
ATE only, because the newly punished motorists are less-responsive than the average driver.
With reverse selection on gains, the two components work in the same direction. There is a
safety beneﬁt from increasing harshness for the average driver, and then an additional safety
beneﬁt from reallocating ﬁnes to a particularly responsive group of motorists.
As mentioned above, we ﬁnd reverse selection on gains, with treatment eﬀects larger
among the currently untreated motorists. Our estimates indicate that eliminating discre-
tion would reduce the recidivism rate by 0.78 percentage points. The decline explained by
increasing ﬁne harshness for the average driver is given by (1 −p)·ATE = 0.41 percentage
points (53 percent of the total), while the decline explained by the reallocation of ﬁnes is
given by (1 −p)·(ATU−ATE) = 0.37 percent points (47 percent of the total). Hence, we
ﬁnd that each channel is equally important in explaining reduced reoﬀending rates without
discretion.
This is an especially important point that warrants further discussion. Our decomposition
reveals that oﬃcer discretion is actually more harmful to public safety than it might otherwise
19
be, speciﬁcally because of which motorists are currently sorted into harsh sanctions. A useful
way to see this point is to note that the total feasible deterrence in this setting is given by
the ATE = −0.012, which is the per-person decline in reoﬀending induced by harsh ﬁnes if
every driver were issued a harsh ﬁne. Currently, oﬃcers achieve just p · ATT = −0.004 in
deterrence, or only about one third of the total feasible deterrence.
We can also note that, based on the ATT and ATU, safety improvements are feasible
even holding the share of harsh ﬁnes constant at the current rate. Speciﬁcally, consider
a counterfactual reallocation of harsh ﬁnes which holds constant the share of harsh ﬁnes
at p = 0.657 but reallocates harsh ﬁnes to all currently untreated motorists. Under this
reallocation, currently untreated motorists would comprise 52 percent of the treated sample,
with the remainder a random sample of the currently treated motorists.
The achieved
deterrence in this reallocation is p · (0.52 · ATU + 0.48 · ATT) = −0.0098, or 83 percent
of the feasible deterrence. If oﬃcers had instead sorted motorists in this way, the safety
gain from eliminating discretion would amount to just a 0.22 percentage point decline in the
reoﬀending rate.
5.5
Robustness
Table 3 explores the robustness of our extrapolation-based estimates. In panel (a), we present
results based on polynomial versions of equation 1, with the ﬁrst row corresponding to our
baseline quadratic speciﬁcation. In panel (b), we show estimates based on non-parametric
speciﬁcations, which take the ψ-adjusted average reoﬀending rate for oﬃcers in the left
and right tails of the stringency distribution as our estimates of E(Yi0) and E(Yi1), using
diﬀerent bandwidths to deﬁne these “extreme” oﬃcers. In panel (c), we replicate our baseline
quadratic speciﬁcation, replacing our measure of oﬃcer stringency with a propensity score,
estimated by regressing harsh ﬁnes on stringency and beat-shift eﬀects and constructing
predicted values.8
The key parameter for computing our no-discretion counterfactual, the average treatment
eﬀect on the untreated (ATU), is shown in column 7.
Our baseline estimate is −0.023
(se = 0.009) and the estimates from the various speciﬁcations range from −0.015 (se = 0.008)
to −0.28 (se = 0.009). Importantly, the estimate from our most ﬂexible speciﬁcation, which
8See appendix ﬁgure C-2 for a graphical depiction of extrapolation-based estimates of E(Yi0)
and E(Yi1) under various functional form assumptions. An important takeaway from ﬁgure C-
2 is that our estimate of E(Yi1) is completely insensitive functional form assumptions because
we observe many oﬃcers who treat all motorists harshly. Many fewer oﬃcers treat all motorists
leniently and, accordingly, our estimates of E(Yi0) vary more across speciﬁcations (although nearly
all estimates are within the 95 percent conﬁdence interval of our baseline quadratic estimate). This
fact, combined with equations 2 and 3, explains why our estimates of the ATU are much more
consistent across speciﬁcations than our estimates of the ATT.
20
uses the ψ-adjusted average outcomes for oﬃcers with Z < 0.01 and Z > 0.99 and is shown
in the third row of panel (c), is nearly identical to our baseline estimate (ATU = −0.024;
se = 0.009).
Table 3 also illustrates the robustness of the broader selection patterns discussed above.
In particular, column (8) summarizes the degree of reverse selection on gains by reporting the
ATT−ATU diﬀerence, our estimates of which range from 0.009 to 0.029 and are statistically
signiﬁcant in some, but not all, speciﬁcations. In our most ﬂexible speciﬁcation, the asso-
ciated p-value is 0.106, just outside of conventional signiﬁcance levels. Note that in section
5.7 below, we brieﬂy discuss estimates of this diﬀerence based on an alternative marginal
treatment eﬀects approach, which requires additional assumptions but delivers meaningful
precision gains.
Column 4 summarizes the degree of positive selection on levels across speciﬁcations by
reporting the diﬀerence in untreated reoﬀending rates for treated and untreated motorists
These estimates are quite consistent across approaches, ranging from 0.032 to 0.046, and are
statistically signiﬁcant at conventional levels in all speciﬁcations.
In panel (d) of table 3, we report estimates from variations of our baseline quadratic
speciﬁcation which use alternative approaches for adjusting for beat-shift eﬀects. In the ﬁrst
(second) row, we estimate our baseline quadratic speciﬁcation, including beat-shift eﬀects,
separately for troops (counties), and then aggregate up the estimates, weighting by sample
shares. In the third row, we replicate the within-locations approach of Feigenberg & Miller
(2022), described in detail in appendix E-1. In all three speciﬁcations, we obtain similar
estimates for the ATU and observe comparable degrees of selection on levels and reverse
selection on gains.
5.6
Other oﬀending outcomes
In table 4, we present extrapolation-based estimates from our baseline quadratic speciﬁcation
for other safety outcomes of interest. Focusing ﬁrst on panel (a), the second row shows that
patterns are similar when we focus only on reoﬀenses for speeding, a subset of our baseline
outcome. While reoﬀending rates for speeding alone are slightly lower, the treatment eﬀect
on speeding recidivism for untreated motorists is actually even larger than the ATU in our
baseline estimate when rescaled by the untreated reoﬀending rate. In the third row, we again
ﬁnd similar patterns for crash involvement. When issued lenient ﬁnes, motorists treated
harshly are involved in a crash with probability 0.081, whereas motorists receiving lenient
ﬁnes are involved in a crash with probability 0.77 (diﬀerence = 0.004; se = 0.002). The
treatment eﬀect on treated drivers is a small and statistically insigniﬁcant 0.001 (se = 0.002).
For untreated drivers, the eﬀect is −0.005 (se = 0.003), which is marginally signiﬁcant
21
but represents a sizable decline, about 6.5 percent, relative to their overall rate of crash
involvement.9
Crash involvement has two key strengths as an outcome measure. First, as highlighted
in section 4, this measure does not depend on police enforcement activity, so there is no
concern that the outcome is sensitive to reporting. And second, car crashes carries direct
social costs. A large literature has sought to identify the monetary cost from various forms
of injury, using data from labor markets and other settings (see Viscusi & Aldy 2003 for
an extensive review). We use the value of a statistical injury (VSI) to get a sense of the
monetary beneﬁt of these abated car accidents.
We borrow a recent VSI estimate from
Guardado & Ziebarth (2019) of $45,000, and multiplying this estimate with our ATU gives
$225. To put this dollar value in perspective, giving a harsh ticket to the average untreated
driver would increase their ﬁne by approximately $125. So each additional dollar in ﬁnes
issued to this group yields over one dollar and eighty cents in social value from reduced car
accidents.
In panel (b) of table 4, we replace these binary outcome measures with counts of each
type of incident for each driver over the two years following the focal FHP citation. In all
cases, selection patterns are similar when using counts instead of binary outcomes. Focusing
on the ﬁrst row, columns 2–4 illustrate that selection on levels is comparable when using this
alternative notion of reoﬀending: when issued lenient ﬁnes, treated motorists commit 0.24
(se = 0.038) more traﬃc oﬀenses over the following two years than untreated motorists. As
a percentage of the recidivism rate for untreated motorists (22 percent), this diﬀerence is
slightly larger than the diﬀerence in our baseline speciﬁcation (14 percent).
Columns 6–8 illustrate that reverse selection on gains is signiﬁcantly more pronounced
when examining the number of future traﬃc oﬀenses. Here, the ATT is nearly identical to
that when using the binary measure (ﬁrst row), but the ATU is four times larger. Repeating
our baseline counterfactual calculation, we ﬁnd that eliminating discretion would result in
(1 −p) · ATU = 0.095 fewer oﬀenses per cited motorist in the following two years. Based
on the average number of traﬃc citations annually in our sample, this amounts to about
16,000 fewer expected traﬃc oﬀenses over the next two years when removing discretion for
all tickets in a single year.
5.7
Comparison with marginal treatment eﬀects
An alternative approach to identifying treatment eﬀect parameters beyond the LATE is to
utilize the marginal treatment eﬀects framework (Bjorklund & Moﬃtt, 1987; Heckman &
9In the appendix, ﬁgure C-5 graphically depicts the extrapolations underlying these estimates
and and table C-1 reports the corresponding estimates when using local means to estimate E(Yi0)
and E(Yi0) instead of the quadratic speciﬁcation.
22
Vytlacil, 2007). In our setting, this approach supposes that selection into treatment can be
modeled as a threshold crossing rule, D = 1[µD(Z) > UD], which depends on characteristics
Z, including both X and our stringency instrument, and unobservable UD. Each individual
has a ﬁxed value of UD, their resistance to treatment. The higher one’s value of UD, the
greater their realization of µ(Z) must be for that individual to take up treatment. Without
loss of generality, we can assume UD has a uniform distribution, so that µD(Z) reﬂects the
probability of treatment at Z (i.e., the propensity score).
The marginal treatment eﬀect is deﬁned as MTE(u) = E(Y1−Y0|UD = u), the treatment
eﬀect for individuals who are induced into treatment at propensity score u. In this framework,
the ATU is deﬁned as a weighted average of MTE’s, ATU =
󰁕1
0 MTE(u)hUT(u)du, where
the weights, hUT(u) = Pr(µD(Z)≤uD)
E(1−µD(Z)) , reﬂect the probability that an individual at resistance to
treatment u has a suﬃciently low propensity score to avoid treatment. The ATT is deﬁned
analogously, with weight hTT = Pr(µD(Z)>uD)
E(µD(Z))
, and the ATE is deﬁned with a uniform weight
across MTE’s.
The key assumption of the marginal treatment eﬀects approach is that treatment is
characterized by the threshold crossing rule: individuals have a ﬁxed resistance to treatment
UD, and their propensity score µD(Z) depends only on observables and the instrument but
is otherwise invariant across individuals. This rule implies the strict monotonicity of Imbens
& Angrist (1994), since all individuals who take up treatment at a given value of µD(Z)
would also take up treatment at greater values (Vytlacil, 2002). However, a strength of
the marginal treatment eﬀects approach is that, with assumptions on the functional form
for MTE(u), various treatment eﬀects can be identiﬁed beyond LATE without necessarily
having full support of the instrument (Mogstad et al., 2018; Mogstad & Torgovitsky, 2018).
In appendix ﬁgure C-9, we present estimated MTE curves for the eﬀect of ﬁnes on
reoﬀending. We show both polynomial parametric speciﬁcations for the marginal treatment
eﬀect, MTE = 󰁓K
k=0 θkvk, as well as a non-parametric speciﬁcation.10 In all cases, we ﬁnd
a pattern of reverse selection on gains, consistent with our extrapolation estimates: drivers
with higher levels of resistance to treatment (i.e., a lower likelihood of facing harsh ﬁnes)
exhibit more negative treatment eﬀects.
In appendix table C-4, we use these MTE curves to construct estimates of the ATE,
ATT, and ATU, based on the formulas above.
The estimates are remarkably similar to
the extrapolation-based estimates.
In particular, the ATU estimates range from −0.023
to −0.027, aligning with our extrapolation estimate of −0.023. While the MTE approach
10We estimate the MTE as follows: we ﬁrst estimate a ﬁrst-stage regression of D on X, Z, and
beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀects W, and then construct an estimated propensity score ˆp for each driver. We
then estimate a conditional expectation of Y on X, W, and a polynomial in ˆp. The derivative of
the polynomial in ˆp is the marginal treatment eﬀect (Carneiro et al., 2011). We calculate standard
errors using the oﬃcer-level bootstrap procedure described in Section 5.2.
23
requires a potentially strong assumption of strict monotonicity, our results oﬀer reassurance
that this approach provides reasonable estimates for a wide range of important treatment
eﬀects.
Moreover, table C-4 highlights a consequential beneﬁt of imposing the additional assump-
tions required for the MTE approach: statistical precision. While ATU estimates based on
extrapolation and MTE approaches are remarkably similar, standard errors are about half
as large for the MTE-based estimates. These precision beneﬁts are even more pronounced
when examining our summary measure of reverse selection on gains (the ATT−ATU diﬀer-
ence). While the p-values associated with this parameter hover between 0.1 and 0.2 in some
extrapolation speciﬁcations (see table 3), this diﬀerence is statistically signiﬁcant at the one
percent level in all MTE speciﬁcations.
5.8
General deterrence eﬀects
Our analysis of counterfactual reoﬀending rates without oﬃcer discretion focuses only on
the speciﬁc deterrence eﬀects of changing sanctions for cited motorists, holding that sample
of cited motorists constant. An important caveat associated with our calculations, then, is
that eliminating discretion may also have eﬀects on oﬀending through a general deterrence
channel. Speciﬁcally, eliminating oﬃcer lenience would increase the expected ﬁne associated
with speeding, which may deter potential speeders.
General deterrence eﬀects associated with eliminating oﬃcer lenience should, if anything,
increase public safety, further increasing the net social beneﬁt of eliminating discretion that
we discuss above. Unfortunately, our data and setting do not permit credible identiﬁcation of
general deterrence eﬀects associated with changing ﬁne amounts. Moreover, as discussed in
section 5.4, our ﬁndings imply that safety gains are feasible even holding general deterrence
eﬀects constant.
Importantly, the literature on criminal deterrence suggests that general deterrence eﬀects
associated with modest increases in ﬁne amounts may be negligible. While a large litera-
ture has documented that potential oﬀenders are deterred by increases in the probability
of apprehension (e.g., Makowsky & Stratmann 2011, Mello 2019), evidence on the deter-
rence eﬀects of changes in sanctions is considerably more mixed (Chalﬁn & McCrary, 2017).
Even dramatic and highly salient changes in sanctions, such as the increased probability of
carceral punishment at the age of majority or changes in capital punishment regimes have
been shown to have minimal general deterrence eﬀects (e.g., Lee & McCrary 2017; Chalﬁn
& McCrary 2017).
24
6
Understanding oﬃcer behavior
Our analyses above yield the clear takeaway that current oﬃcer behavior generates reverse
selection on gains: motorists who currently face harsh ﬁnes are less responsive to those harsh
sanctions than those who currently receive lenient ﬁnes. We also ﬁnd stark selection on
levels: treated motorists reoﬀend at much higher rates than untreated motorists when issued
lenient ﬁnes. In this section, we consider potential explanations for this oﬃcer behavior.
Importantly, our central conclusion that oﬃcer discretion over sanctions harms public safety
does not depend on the underlying reasons for this oﬃcer behavior. However, the potential for
alternative policy tools, other than the altogether removal of trooper discretion, to improve
safety could depend on the rationale underlying oﬃcer decisions.
6.1
Driver characteristics
One possibility is that the selection patterns we observe are driven by oﬃcers making sanction
decisions based on salient driver characteristics, such as oﬀending history or race, that are
incidentally positively correlated with reoﬀending levels and negatively correlated with de-
terrability. Evidence that oﬃcers consider driver characteristics when making discretionary
sanction choices can be seen easily in column 2 of table A-2, which illustrates that our full
set of driver covariates are jointly predictive of a harsh charge (F = 28.8) after conditioning
on beat-shift eﬀects. Hence, a natural question is to what extent decisions based on driver
observables can explain the patterns of selection on levels and reverse selection on gains that
we document.
Figure 5 explores this question.
We split motorists into 32 cells based on gender ×
race × 1[age ≥35] × 1[any citation in the past year] and, within each cell, compute the
average reoﬀending level E(Yi0) and average treatment eﬀect E(Yi1 −Yi0) using a quadratic
extrapolation.
We then explore the relationship between these estimated group-speciﬁc
parameters and the group-speciﬁc harshness rate (the rate at which motorists with those
characteristics face harsh ﬁnes). As shown in panels (a) and (b), the types of motorists
who are punished harshly more often also exhibit signiﬁcantly higher reoﬀending rates and
slightly less negative treatment eﬀects. These patterns are consistent with our main ﬁndings
and suggest that easily observable motorist characteristics can explain at least some share
of the positive selection on levels and reverse selection on gains that we observe.
However, panel (c) of ﬁgure 5 also presents extrapolation-based estimates which are
computed within these 32 covariate cells, with our baseline estimates also shown for com-
parison. The ﬁgure clearly illustrates that selection on levels and reverse selection on gains
persist in these within-covariate speciﬁcations, although both are attenuated slightly, con-
sistent with the discussion above. In our baseline speciﬁcation, the diﬀerence in E(Yi0) for
25
treated and untreated motorists is 0.046, while the corresponding within-covariate diﬀerence
is 0.033. Moving from our baseline speciﬁcation to a within-covariate speciﬁcation reduces
the ATT−ATU diﬀerence from 0.016 to 0.1. Hence, oﬃcer sanction decisions based on driver
characteristics can only explain about 30-35 percent of the overall selection patterns.11
Considering that oﬀending history is likely an especially salient characteristic for oﬃ-
cers when making their sanction decisions, ﬁgure 6 further explores heterogeneity based on
driving history. Speciﬁcally, we compute extrapolation-based estimates of average potential
outcomes and treatment eﬀects for motorists with and without at least one traﬃc citation
in the past two years (because we can observe at least two years of driving history for every
motorist in our sample). Panel (a) plots the group-speciﬁc quadratic extrapolations and
panel (b) plots the associated group-speciﬁc untreated oﬀending levels and treatment eﬀects
by treatment status.
Note that, in both panels, we adjust the level of the axes, but keep the scale the same,
because those with prior oﬀenses reoﬀend at signiﬁcantly higher rates. Despite these diﬀer-
ences in the level of oﬀending, however, we ﬁnd strikingly similar selection patterns across
groups.12 Interestingly, this ﬁgure suggests that even among motorists without prior oﬀenses,
oﬃcer treatment decisions select motorists with a higher likelihood of reoﬀending but who
are less deterrable.
6.2
The importance of stopped speed
Another possible explanation for the observed selection patterns is that oﬃcers may punish
drivers based primarily on oﬀense severity, or, in this case, the true rather than manipulated
speed.. If driving speed were positively correlated with the likelihood of reoﬀending but
negatively correlated with treatment eﬀects, punishments based on speed could explain the
selection patterns that we document.
While we can observe the true stopped speed of drivers who are given the harsh ﬁne, this
information is not directly observed for drivers given the lenient ﬁne. However, we can adapt
our extrapolation approach to estimate the average stopped speed of these drivers (which
we explain in more detail in appendix E-2). While the average driver issued a harsh ﬁne is
stopped and ticketed for a speed of 19.1 MPH over the limit, we estimate that drivers given
11Appendix ﬁgures C-7 and C-8 probe the robustness of panels (a) and (b) of 5. See appendix
ﬁgure C-3 for graphical depictions of the within-cell extrapolations underlying the treatment eﬀect
estimates in panel (c) of ﬁgure 5.
12In section 4.3, we discuss suggestive evidence that driver learning can partly explain the de-
terrence eﬀects of harsh ﬁnes. However, ﬁgure 6 rules out that the observed selection patterns can
be explained solely by a learning story, whereby untreated motorists are more responsive because
of less information from prior citations. Reverse selection on gains persists even among motorists
with the same citation history and thus similar access to information about speeding ﬁnes.
26
a lenient ﬁne were stopped on average at 18.2 MPH over. We interpret this diﬀerence as
evidence that, at least to some extent, oﬃcers exhibit retributivist preferences (e.g., Kaplow
& Shavell 2006). In other words, oﬃcers prefer to issue harsher sanctions to more serious
oﬀenders.
How important is this preference for punishment based on “guilt” to the overall selection
patterns we document? To answer this question, we ﬁrst simulate a simple counterfactual
under the assumption that, within each county, oﬃcers consider only stopped speed when
issuing harsh sanctions, holding constant average harshness. Under this counterfactual, the
average stopped speed for harshly and leniently treated drivers would be 21.5 and 14.8 MPH
over, respectively, a much more pronounced diﬀerence than we empirically observe. Hence,
speed alone can only partially explain how oﬃcers set punishment levels.
Next, we ask whether decisions based on oﬀense severity can explain the fact that harshly
treated drivers reoﬀend at higher rates. To do so, we use the supremely stringent oﬃcers to
identify the reoﬀending rates of drivers at diﬀerent speeds. We then estimate the distribution
of stopped speeds for leniently treated drivers, using a variation of our baseline extrapolation
approach. We ﬁnd that while harshly treated drivers have a predicted reoﬀending rate of
0.362 based on their stopped speeds, this ﬁgure is 0.355 for leniently treated drivers. This
gap is only about 15 percent of the estimated true diﬀerence in reoﬀending, shown in table 3.
Overall, these estimates suggest that, while stopped speed is an important factor in oﬃcer’s
punishment decisions, it can only explain a small portion of the overall selection patterns.
6.3
Information
Another potential explanation for the patterns we document is that oﬃcers attempt to
allocate harsh sanctions to more deterrable motorists but have poor information about how
to achieve that goal. Under this hypothesis, we might expect selection patterns to change as
oﬃcers acquire more information, and we present a simple test of this hypothesis in panels
(a) and (b) of appendix ﬁgure C-6. We split oﬃcers based on experience as of January 2007,
the start of our sample (oﬃcers who begin after 2007 are included in the low experience
group), and estimate the ATE, ATT, and ATU for more and less experienced oﬃcers using
our extrapolation-based approach. Although the ﬁgure suggests slightly weaker selection on
levels among more experienced oﬃcers, the extent of reverse selection on gains is, if anything,
more extreme among oﬃcers with at least ﬁve years of experience. We should note, however,
that oﬃcers are not explicitly provided information on the reoﬀending outcomes associated
with their citations, so this test yields only suggestive evidence at best.
On the other hand, oﬃcers receive explicit feedback on whether their citations are con-
tested in court and, as discussed in section 2.4, we posit a distaste for traﬃc court as a
27
central motivation for issuing lenient citations. Hence, a natural question is whether oﬃcers
seem to allocate sanctions strategically to minimize their time in traﬃc court. Panels (c)
and (d) of ﬁgure C-6 replicates the analysis in panel (a) and (b), replacing the outcome with
whether the citation was contested in court. Note that harsh ﬁnes increase the likelihood
that a citation is contested, hence the treatment eﬀects go in the opposite direction of those
in panel (b). This ﬁgure shows minimal evidence of selection on gains in either direction and
no evidence of diﬀerential selection on gains by oﬃcer experience.
6.4
Discussion
Above, we show that that selection patterns cannot be explained away by oﬃcers making
sanction decisions based on salient observables or guilt. We also ﬁnd suggestive evidence
against the hypothesis that oﬃcers allocate sanctions to maximize other objectives or that
oﬃcers strive for safety maximization but act on poor information. This leaves two potential
explanations for the allocation of hash ﬁnes that we observe.
First, oﬃcers may allocate harsh ﬁnes based on unobservable characteristics which are
(incidentally) positively correlated with the likelihood of recidivism and negatively correlated
with deterrability. For example, troopers likely issue harsh sanctions to motorists who behave
confrontationally during the traﬃc stop. If these motorists tend to reoﬀend at higher rates
and are undeterred by harsh ﬁnes, this would explain the selection patterns we ﬁnd. Or
alternatively, oﬃcers may explicitly prioritize issuing harsh sanctions to the oﬀenders they
perceive as having the highest risk of recidivism. These two explanations are observationally
equivalent from the perspective of the econometrician and thus cannot be distinguished. But
in either case, the current allocation of sanctions, which results in harsh ﬁnes for high-risk
but undeterred motorists, likely reﬂects the desired allocation of oﬃcers.
On one hand, we might conclude that a mismatch between the deterrence objectives of
the state and the goals of the police is an important reason why oﬃcer discretion harms
public safety. On the other hand, we should acknowledge that the goal of allocating harsh
sanctions to the highest-risk oﬀenders may be a legitimate law enforcement goal or may, in
fact, reﬂect the preferences of the state. In particular, this objective accords well with an
intuitive notion of fairness: the “worst” drivers “deserve” the most severe punishments.
To the extent that the state values this notion of fairness, a key takeaway from our
empirical analyses is the existence of a tradeoﬀbetween fairness and eﬃciency. Because
the subgroup of motorists with the highest recidivism risk are the least responsive to harsh
ﬁnes, oﬃcers face a tradeoﬀbetween achieving fairness and maximizing safety when sorting
some, but not all, motorists into harsh sanctions. While the literature has discussed the
potential importance of this tradeoﬀfor the design of legal and criminal justice institutions
28
from a theoretical perspective (e.g., Kaplow & Shavell 2006), we are the ﬁrst to document
its empirical relevance.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, we study the public safety implications of police discretion over sanctions for
speeding oﬀenses. First, relying on variation across oﬃcers in the propensity to issue harsh
ﬁnes, we show that sanctions decisions have important deterrence eﬀects. Comparing mo-
torists cited in the same beat-shifts by oﬃcers of varying stringency, we ﬁnd that higher ﬁnes
reduce the likelihood of a new traﬃc oﬀense, a new speeding oﬀense, and crash involvement
in the following year.
We then assess the overall contribution of discretion to public safety by comparing ob-
served reoﬀending rates to those in a counterfactual scenario without oﬃcer discretion. This
counterfactual is identiﬁed by the average treatment eﬀect for motorists currently issued
lenient ﬁnes (i.e., the average treatment eﬀect on the untreated or ATU), which may diﬀer
from the local average treatment eﬀect recovered by our 2SLS estimates. We rely on a novel,
two-step approach to estimate the ATU which leverages identiﬁcation at inﬁnity (e.g., Hull
2020) and, importantly, does not require an instrument monotonicity assumption.
Based on our estimated ATU, eliminating oﬃcer discretion would reduce the reoﬀending
rate by about two percent. We show that about half of this safety improvement can be
attributed to increasing ﬁne harshness for the average driver, while the other half can be
attributed to changing which motorists receive harsh ﬁnes. The importance of the second
channel stems from the fact that current oﬃcer decisions generate reverse selection on gains:
the average treatment eﬀect for motorists that currently receive lenient ﬁnes are nearly four
times larger than those for motorists currently issued harsh ﬁnes. A back-of-the-envelope
calculation suggests that every $125 in ﬁnes issued to the population of currently untreated
motorists results in $225 in social welfare gains from reduced auto accidents.
We conclude by discussing some potential explanations for the oﬃcer behavior we doc-
ument. To accompany the reverse selection on gains we ﬁnd, we also show stark, positive
selection on levels: motorists facing harsh ﬁnes reoﬀend at signiﬁcantly higher rates than
those facing lenient ﬁnes. These selection patterns (both levels and gains) persist within
driver covariates, cannot be explained by motorist “guilt,” and are present among expe-
rienced oﬃcers. Though not deﬁnitive, the preponderance of evidence aligns well with the
view that the current allocation reﬂects the goals of oﬃcers. Speciﬁcally, oﬃcers target harsh
sanctions to motorists with high recidivism risk, which accords with an intuitive notion of
fairness.
These motorists are also the least deterrable, and hence the “undoing” of this
sorting when removing discretion gives rise to meaningful safety gains.
29
References
Abaluck, J., Agha, L., Kabrhel, C., Raja, A., & Venkatesh, A. (2016). The determinants
of productivity in medial testing: Intensity and allocation of care. American Economic
Review, 106(2), 3730–64.
Abdulkadiroglu, A., Pathak, P., & Schellenberg, J. (2020). Do parents value school eﬀec-
tiveness? American Economic Review, 110(5), 1502–1539.
Abrams, D., Goonetilleke, P., & Fang, H. (2021). Do cops know who to stop? assessing
optimizing models of police behavior wih a natural experiment. Unpublished manuscript.
Anbarci, N. & Lee, J. (2014). Detecting racial bias in speed discounting: Evidence from
speeding tickets in Boston. International Review of Law and Economics, 38, 11–24.
Andrews, D. W. & Schafgans, M. M. (1998). Semiparametric estimation of the intercept of
a sample selection model. The Review of Economic Studies, 65(3), 497–517.
Angelova, V., Dobbie, W., & Yang, C. (2023). Algorithmic recommendations and human
discretion. Unpublished manuscript.
Arnold, D., Dobbie, W., & Hull, P. (2022). Measuring racial discrimination in bail decisions.
American Economic Review, 112(9), 2992–3038.
Ash, E. & MacLeod, W. B. (2015).
Intrinsic motivation in public service: Theory and
evidence from state supreme courts. The Journal of Law and Economics, 58(4), 863–913.
Ashenfelter, O. & Greenstone, M. (2004). Using mandated speed limits to measure the value
of a statistical life. Journal of Political Economy, 112(S1), S226–S267.
Ba, B., Knox, D., Mummolo, J., & Rivera, R. (2021). Diversity in policing: The role of oﬃcer
race and gender in police-civilian interactions in Chicago. Science, 371(6530), 696–702.
Bandiera, O., Best, M. C., Khan, A. Q., & Prat, A. (2021). The allocation of authority in
organizations: A ﬁeld experiment with bureaucrats. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
136(4), 2195–2242.
Banﬁeld, E. (1975). Corruption as a feature of governmental organization. Journal of Law
and Economics, 18(3), 587–605.
Becker, G. S. (1968). Crime and punishment: An economic approach. Journal of Political
Economy, 76(2), 169–217.
Best, M. C., Hjort, J., & Szakonyi, D. (2017). Individuals and organizations as sources of
state eﬀectiveness. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bhuller, M., Dahl, G., Loken, K., & Mogstad, M. (2020). Incarceration, recidivism, and
employment. Journal of Political Economy, 128(4), 1269–1324.
30
Bjorklund, A. & Moﬃtt, R. (1987).
The estimation of wage gains and welfare gains in
self-selection models. Review of Economics and Statistics, 69(1), 42–49.
Blincoe, L., Miller, T., Zaloshnja, E., & Lawrence, B. (2015). The economic and societal
impact of motor vehicle crashes, 2010. National Highway Safety Administration Technical
Report.
Brinch, C. N., Mogstad, M., & Wiswall, M. (2017). Beyond late with a discrete instrument.
Journal of Political Economy, 125(4), 985–1039.
Carneiro, P., Heckman, J. J., & Vytlacil, E. J. (2011).
Estimating marginal returns to
education. American Economic Review, 101(6), 2754–81.
Cattaneo, M., Crump, R., Farrell, M., & Feng, Y. (2021).
On Binscatter.
Unpublished
Manuscript.
Chalﬁn, A. (2016). The economic cost of crime. The Encyclopedia of Crime and Punishment.
Chalﬁn, A. & Goncalves, F. (2021). The professional motivations of police oﬃcers. Unpub-
lished manuscript.
Chalﬁn, A. & McCrary, J. (2017). Criminal deterrence: A review of the literature. Journal
of Economic Literature, 55(1), 5–48.
Chamberlain, G. (1986). Asymptotic eﬃciency in semi-parametric models with censoring.
journal of Econometrics, 32(2), 189–218.
Chandra, A. & Staiger, D. (2020). Identifying sources of ineﬃciency in healthcare. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 135(2), 785–843.
Cornelissen, T., Dustmann, C., Raute, A., & Sch¨onberg, U. (2016).
From late to mte:
Alternative methods for the evaluation of policy interventions. Labour Economics, 41,
47–60.
Dahl, G., Kostol, A., & Mogstad, M. (2014). Family welfare cultures. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 129(4), 1711–1752.
DeAngelo, G. & Hansen, B. (2014). Life and death in the fast lane: Police enforcement and
traﬃc fatalities. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2), 231–257.
Dobbie, W., Goldin, J., & Yang, C. (2018). The eﬀects of pretrial detention on convic-
tion, future crime, and employment: Evidence from randomly assigned judges. American
Economic Review, 108(2), 201–40.
Dobbie, W. & Song, J. (2015). Debt relief and debtor outcomes: Measuring the eﬀects of
consumer bankruptcy protection. The American Economic Review, 105(3), 1272–1311.
Dusek, L. & Traxler, C. (2021). Learning from law enforcement. Journal of the European
Economic Association, forthcoming.
31
Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., Ji, Y., & Mahoney, N. (2022). Voluntary regulation: Evidence
from medicare payment reform. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 137(1), 565–618.
Feigenberg, B. & Miller, C. (2022). Would eliminating racial disparities in motor vehicle
searches have eﬃciency costs? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 137(1), 49–113.
Finlay, K., Gross, M., Luh, E., & Mueller-Smith, M. (2022). The impact of ﬁnancial sanc-
tions in the us justice system: Regression discontinuity evidence from michigans driver
responsibility program. Unpublished manuscript.
Frandsen, B., Lefgren, L., & Leslie, E. (2019). Judging judge ﬁxed eﬀects. NBER Working
Paper 25528.
Frandsen, B. R. (2017). Party bias in union representation elections: Testing for manip-
ulation in the regression discontinuity design when the running variable is discrete. In
Regression Discontinuity Designs: Theory and Applications (pp. 281–315). Emerald Pub-
lishing Limited.
Gehrsitz, M. (2017). Speeding, punishment, and recidivism: Evidence from a regression
discontinuity design. The Journal of Law and Economics, 60(3), 497–528.
Goncalves, F. & Mello, S. (2021). A few bad apples? racial bias in policing. American
Economic Review, 111(5), 1406–1441.
Guardado, J. R. & Ziebarth, N. R. (2019). Worker investments in safety, workplace accidents,
and compensating wage diﬀerentials. International Economic Review, 60(1), 133–155.
Hansen, B. (2015). Punishment and deterrence: Evidence from drunk driving. American
Economic Review, 105(4), 1581–1617.
Heckman, J. (1979).
Sample selection bias as speciﬁcation error.
Econometrica, 71(1),
53–161.
Heckman, J. (1990). Varieties of selection bias. The American Economic Review, 80(2),
313–318.
Heckman, J. J. & Vytlacil, E. J. (2007). Chapter 71 econometric evaluation of social pro-
grams, part ii: Using the marginal treatment eﬀect to organize alternative econometric
estimators to evaluate social programs, and to forecast their eﬀects in new environments.
volume 6 of Handbook of Econometrics (pp. 4875–5143). Elsevier.
Hull, P. (2020). Estimating hospital quality with quasi-experimental data.
Imbens, G. W. & Angrist, J. D. (1994).
Identiﬁcation and estimation of local average
treatment eﬀects. Econometrica, 62(2), 467–475.
Kang, K. & Silveira, B. S. (2021).
Understanding disparities in punishment: Regulator
preferences and expertise. Journal of Political Economy, 129(10), 2947–2992.
Kaplow, L. & Shavell, S. (2006). Fairness versus welfare. Harvard University Press.
32
Kling, J. R. (2006). Incarceration length, employment, and earnings. The American economic
review, 96(3), 863–876.
Lee, D. & McCrary, J. (2017). The deterrence eﬀec of prison: Dynamic theory and evidence.
Advances in Econometrics, 38(3).
Lipsky, M. (1980). Street-level bureaucracy: dilemmas of the individual in public services.
Luca, D. (2014). Do traﬃc tickets reduce motor vehicle accidents? Evidence from a natural
experiment. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 34(1), 85–106.
Maestas, N., Mullen, K., & Strand, A. (2013). Does disability insurance disourage work? us-
ing examiner assignment to estimate causal eﬀects of ssdi receipt. The American Economic
Review, 103(5), 1797–1829.
Makowsky, M. & Stratmann, T. (2011). More tickets, fewer accidents: How cash-strapped
towns make for safer roads. The Journal of Law and Economics, 54(4), 863–888.
Mello, S. (2019). More cops, less crime. Journal of Public Economics, 172, 174–200.
Mello, S. (2021). Fines and ﬁnancial wellbeing. Working paper.
Mogstad, M., Santos, A., & Torgovitsky, A. (2018). Using instrumental variables for inference
about policy relevant treatment parameters. Econometrica, 86(5), 1589–1619.
Mogstad, M. & Torgovitsky, A. (2018). Identiﬁcation and extrapolation of causal eﬀects
with instrumental variables. Annual Review of Economics, 10, 577–613.
Moore, M. S. (2019). The moral worth of retribution. In Retribution (pp. 337–388). Rout-
ledge.
Morris, C. (1983). Parametric empirical bayes inference: Theory and applications. Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 78(381), 47–55.
Mueller-Smith, M. (2015). The criminal and labor market impacts of incarceration. Unpub-
lished working paper, 18.
Nagin, D. (2013). Deterrence: A review of the evidence by a criminologist for economists.
Annual Review of Economics, 5, 83–105.
NHTSA (2014). Traﬃc safety facts: 2012 data. National Highway Safety Administration
Technical Report.
Norris, S. (2022). Examiner inconsistency: Evidence from refugee decisions. Unpublished
manuscript.
O’Flaherty, B. & Sethi, R. (2019). Shadows of doubt: Stereotypes, crime, and the pursuit of
justice. Harvard University Press.
Polinsky, A. M. & Shavell, S. (2000). The fairness of sanctions: Some implications for optimal
enforcement policy. American Law and Economics Review, 2(2), 223–237.
33
Prendergast, C. (2007). The motivation and bias of bureaucrats. American Economic Review,
97(1), 180–196.
Rubin, D. (1981). The Bayesian bootstrap. The Annals of Statistics, 9(1), 130–134.
Traxler, C., Westermeier, F., & Wohlschlegel, A. (2018). Bunching on the Autobahn? Speed-
ing responses to a notched penalty scheme. Journal of Public Economics, 157, 78–94.
Van Dijk, W. (2019). The socioeconomic consequences of housing assistance. Unpublished
manuscript.
Viscusi, W. K. & Aldy, J. E. (2003). The value of a statistical life: a critical review of market
estimates throughout the world. Journal of risk and uncertainty, 27, 5–76.
Vytlacil, E. (2002). Independence, monotonicity, and latent index models: An equivalence
result. Econometrica, 70(1), 331–341.
Weisburst, E. (2017). Whose help is on the way? the importance of individual police oﬃcers
in law enforcement outcomes. Unpublished manuscript.
Wilson, J. (1989). Bureaucracy: What government agencies do and why they do it.
34
Table 1: Summary Statistics
By Fines
(1)
(2)
(3)
All
Discounted
Harsh
Panel A: Demographics
Female
0.384
0.415
0.368
Age
36.47
36.98
36.20
Age Missing
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
Race = White
0.474
0.525
0.448
Race = Black
0.154
0.157
0.152
Race = Hispanic
0.187
0.144
0.209
Race = Other
0.041
0.034
0.044
Race = Unknown
0.144
0.140
0.147
Panel B: Socioeconomic Status
Zip Income
57962
56459
58745
Zip Income Missing
0.101
0.107
0.097
Vehicle Value
17807
17297
18073
Vehicle Info Missing
0.143
0.139
0.145
Panel C: Oﬀending History
Prior Prison Spell
0.009
0.009
0.009
Citation Past Year
0.350
0.317
0.368
Speeding Past Year
0.179
0.158
0.189
Other Past Year
0.253
0.226
0.268
Crash Past Year
0.071
0.067
0.074
Panel D: Oﬀense Characteristics
MPH Over Posted
15.62
9.00
19.06
Fine Amount
207.70
123.00
251.79
Contest in Court
0.289
0.222
0.323
Observations
1,693,457
579,760
1,113,697
Notes: This table reports means for the analysis sample. See table A-1 for oﬃcer characteristics.
35
Figure 1: Fine Schedule and Charged Speed Distribution
0
100
200
300
400
Fine Amount
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
Fraction of Citations
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
MPH Over Posted
Lenient Ofﬁcers
Stringent Ofﬁcers
Notes: This ﬁgure plots the distribution of charged speeds on FHP-issued speeding citations in
Florida. Dashed red line shows the ﬁne schedule (right axis). Solid line and circles shows the
aggregate distribution. Dashed lines with hollow diamonds and triangles plot the distribution for
lenient and stringent oﬃcers, respectively, using the method described in section D.
36
Figure 2: Instrument Validity
(a) Ticketing Frequency
β = -0.218 (0.663)
β = 0.235 (0.316)
10
20
30
40
50
60
Adjusted Monthly Citations
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Ofﬁcer Stringency
All Citations
Speeding Citations
(b) Predicted and Past Oﬀending
β = -0.00157 (0.0023)
β = -0.00003 (0.0042)
.34
.345
.35
.355
.36
.365
Pr(Offense)
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Predicted Reoffending
Offense Past Year
(c) First stage estimate
β = 0.944 (0.006)
F =  21966
0
.05
.1
.15
Fraction of Citations
-.75
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
.75
Pr(Harsh Fine)
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Local Mean
Nonparametric Fit
99% CI
Notes: Panel (a) reports the relationship between oﬃcer stringency, residualized of beat-shift eﬀects,
and an oﬃcer’s average monthly number of citations, adjusted for beat-shift eﬀects. Blue circles
report the relationship for all citations and green diamonds report the relationship for only speeding
citations. Panel (b) reports the relationship between oﬃcer stringency, residualized of beat-shift
eﬀects, and predicted reoﬀending based on covariates and past oﬀending, both residualized of beat-
shift eﬀects. Predicted reoﬀending is computed in opposite sample partitions using only tickets
issued by non-bunching oﬃcers (see section D-3 for further details). Panel (c) shows the ﬁrst stage
relationship between stringency and the probability of a harsh ﬁne, both residualized of beat-shit
ﬁxed eﬀects (left axis).
Local binscatter means are denoted by blue circles and the green line
shows a non-parametric ﬁt, with a 99 percent conﬁdence interval indicated by the shaded region.
Figure also illustrates a histogram of the oﬃcer stringency instrument, residualized of beat-shit
ﬁxed eﬀects (right axis). Figure reports the linear ﬁrst stage estimate and associated F-statistic.
37
Figure 3: Reduced Form Over Time
1-year effect:
βRF = -0.0167 (0.0053)
μ = 0.3471
-.015
-.01
-.005
0
.005
.01
.015
Stringency Effect
-8
-4
0
4
8
Quarter Around FHP Citation
RF Estimate
95% CI
Notes: This ﬁgure reports coeﬃcients on oﬃcer stringency from regressions where the outcome of
interest is an indicator for whether the driver received a traﬃc citation in each quarter relative to
the date of their focal FHP citation. τ = 0 denotes the exact date of the focal FHP citation (one day
only, where all motorists receive a citation so the eﬀect of stringency is zero by construction). Re-
gressions also include beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀects. Shaded region denotes 95 percent conﬁdence intervals,
constructed from standard errors clustered at the oﬃcer-level. Identical ﬁgures for other outcomes
are shown in ﬁgure B-2. Figure reports the reduced form coeﬃcient for one-year reoﬀending as well
as the mean one-year reoﬀending rate for lenient oﬃcers.
38
Table 2: Eﬀect of Harsh Fines, LATE Estimates
IV Estimates
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Lenient Mean
βIV
βIV
󰂃
Any Violation
0.347
-0.0177
-0.0159
-0.069
(0.0017)
(0.0016)
(0.007)
Speeding Violation
0.170
-0.0146
-0.0144
-0.127
(0.0013)
(0.0013)
(0.012)
Other Violation
0.256
-0.0119
-0.0097
-0.057
(0.0016)
(0.0015)
(0.009)
Crash Involvement
0.080
-0.0029
-0.0021
-0.040
(0.0010)
(0.0010)
(0.018)
Contest in Court
0.262
0.1125
0.1093
0.626
(0.0014)
(0.0014)
(0.008)
Controls
No
Yes
Yes
Beat-Shift FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
1693457
1693457
1693457
Notes:
This table reports 2SLS estimates of the impact of receiving a harsh ﬁne on one-year
reoﬀending. Standard errors clustered at the oﬃcer -level are in parentheses. First stage estimates
are β = 0.944 (0.006) without controls and β = 0.943 (0.006) with controls. See table B-2 for the
full set of ﬁrst stage and reduced form estimates with and without controls. Implied elasticities
are computed as ˆβIV ×
¯
fine/¯y, where ˆβIV is estimated using the statutory ﬁne as the treatment
variable and the means are the lenient oﬃcer means.
39
Figure 4: Extrapolation and treatment eﬀect estimates
(a) Extrapolation Estimates
Extrapolation Estimates:
E(Y0) = 0.355 (0.004)
E(Y1) = 0.343 (0.002)
.33
.34
.35
.36
.37
.38
Pr(Reoffend)
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Local Mean
Quadratic Fit
(b) Treatment Eﬀects
Treated:
E(Y0) = 0.371 (0.006)
ATT = -0.006 (0.007)
Unreated:
E(Y0) = 0.325 (0.003)
ATU = -0.023 (0.009)
.28
.3
.32
.34
.36
.38
Pr(Reoffend)
All Motorists
Treated
Untreated
Untreated Level
Treatment Effect
Notes: Panel (a) plots the relationship between oﬃcer stringency and driver reoﬀending, adjusted
for beat-shift eﬀects. Circles illustrate a binscatter, adjusted for beat-shift eﬀects using the method
of Cattaneo et al. (2021) and solid line denotes the quadratic ﬁt. Solid circles indicate the implied
estimates of the sample average potential outcomes, E(Yi0) and E(Yi1), with associated 95 con-
ﬁdence intervals. Panel (b) illustrates estimated of the untreated reoﬀending levels, E(Yi0), and
treatment eﬀects, E(Yi1 −Yi0), for all motorists, harshly treaed motorists and untreated (leniently
treated) motorists, constructed from the extrapolation estimates in panel (a).
40
Table 3: Robustness of extrapolation estimates
Y0
Y1 −Y0
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
All
D = 1
D = 0
Diﬀ
All
D = 1
D = 0
Diﬀ
(ATE)
(ATT)
(ATU)
Panel A: Polynomials
q = 2
0.355
0.371
0.325
0.046
-0.012
-0.006
-0.023
0.016
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.012)
q = 3
0.350
0.363
0.325
0.038
-0.006
0.001
-0.019
0.021
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.003)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.012)
q = 4
0.346
0.357
0.325
0.032
-0.002
0.008
-0.021
0.029
(0.007)
(0.011)
(0.003)
(0.011)
(0.008)
(0.012)
(0.010)
(0.016)
q = 8
0.351
0.364
0.325
0.039
-0.008
0.001
-0.024
0.025
(0.013)
(0.019)
(0.003)
(0.019)
(0.014)
(0.019)
(0.012)
(0.023)
Panel B: Local means
bw = 0.1
0.355
0.370
0.325
0.045
-0.009
-0.006
-0.015
0.009
(0.003)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.010)
bw = 0.05
0.355
0.371
0.325
0.046
-0.011
-0.006
-0.019
0.013
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.003)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.012)
bw = 0.01
0.353
0.367
0.325
0.042
-0.010
-0.003
-0.024
0.021
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.003)
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.013)
Panel C: Polyomials in propensity score
q = 2
0.355
0.370
0.325
0.045
-0.013
-0.005
-0.028
0.022
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.011)
Panel D: Within-locations
Troops
0.358
0.375
0.330
0.045
-0.011
-0.010
-0.022
0.012
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.003)
(0.009)
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.014)
Counties
0.366
0.382
0.333
0.049
-0.019
-0.016
-0.028
0.012
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.003)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.011)
(0.024)
(0.028)
FM (2022)
0.355
0.371
0.326
0.045
-0.012
-0.004
-0.026
0.021
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.003)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.009)
Notes: This table reports estimated untreated reoﬀending levels E(Yi0) and treatment eﬀects E(Yi1 −Yi0) for all motorists,
treated motorists, and untreated motorists, using diﬀerent speciﬁcations for obtaining extrapolated estimates of E(Yi0) and
E(Yi1). In panel (a), we show estimates from estimating equation 1 with diﬀerent polynomials in Z. In panel (b), we estimate
equation Z using a piecewise linear speciﬁcation with rule-of-thumb bandwidth = 0.2. In panel (c), we show estimates that use
the beat-shift adjusted average Y for oﬃcers in the tails of the stringency distribution, with bw denoting the bandwidth used
to deﬁne the tails. In panel (d), we present estimates from polynomial speciﬁcations of 1 that replace Z with the estimated
propensity score. Graphical analogues for the underlying extrapolation estimates are shown in ﬁgure C-2.
41
Table 4: Extrapolation estimates for other outcomes
Y0
Y1 −Y0
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
All
D = 1
D = 0
Diﬀ
All
D = 1
D = 0
Diﬀ
(ATE)
(ATT)
(ATU)
Panel A: Any oﬀense in following year
Any Oﬀense
0.355
0.371
0.325
0.046
-0.012
-0.006
-0.023
0.016
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.012)
Speeding
0.179
0.188
0.161
0.028
-0.013
-0.011
-0.015
0.004
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.007)
Crash
0.080
0.081
0.077
0.004
-0.001
0.001
-0.005
0.006
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.004)
Panel B: Number of oﬀenses in following two years
Any Oﬀense
1.278
1.361
1.118
0.243
-0.035
-0.005
-0.095
0.090
(0.025)
(0.036)
(0.016)
(0.038)
(0.027)
(0.039)
(0.046)
(0.066)
Speeding
0.399
0.421
0.355
0.067
-0.025
-0.020
-0.035
0.015
(0.007)
(0.011)
(0.004)
(0.011)
(0.008)
(0.011)
(0.013)
(0.018)
Crash
0.157
0.160
0.151
0.009
0.001
0.004
-0.005
0.009
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.007)
Notes:
This table reports estimated untreated reoﬀending levels E(Yi0) and treatment eﬀects
E(Yi1 −Yi0) for all motorists, treated motorists, and untreated motorists, based on quadratic
extrapolations using equation 1. In panel (a), we show estimates for binary outcomes indicating
whether a motorist commits any new traﬃc oﬀense, a new speeding oﬀense, and is involved in an
auto accident in the following year (the ﬁrst row of panel (a) is identical to the ﬁrst row of table
3). In panel (b), we replace the outcomes with counts of the number of oﬀenses over the following
two years. See appendix ﬁgure C-5 for graphical depictions of the underlying extrapolations and
appendix table C-1 for estimates which alternatively use a local mean estimator for E(Yi0) and
E(Yi1).
42
Figure 5: Reoﬀending levels and treatment eﬀects by motorist characteristics
(a) E(Yi0|X)
β  = 4.244 (0.258)
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
E(Y0)
.6
.64
.68
.72
Harshness Rate
(b) E(Yi1 −Yi0|X)
β  = 0.082 (0.068)
-.05
-.025
0
.025
ATE
.6
.64
.68
.72
Harshness Rate
(c) Levels and gains within covariates
Treated:
E(Y0) = 0.370 (0.005)
ATT = -0.012 (0.005)
Unreated:
E(Y0) = 0.337 (0.003)
ATU = -0.022 (0.006)
.28
.3
.32
.34
.36
.38
Pr(Reoffend)
All Motorists
Treated
Untreated
Baseline
Within Covariates
Notes: This ﬁgure explores selection patterns between and within motorist covariates. We divide
motorists into 32 covariate cells at the level of gender × race × 1[age≥35] × 1[past oﬀense]
and estimate a quadratic extrapolation within each cell. Panel (a) plots the estimated E(Yi0) in
each cell against the cell-level harshness rate (the share of motorists in that cell that face harsh
ﬁnes, adjusted for beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀects). Panel (b) plots the estimated cell-level treatment eﬀect,
E(Yi1 −Yi0) against the same cell-level harshness rate. Both panels report an estimated linear
slope and associated bootstrapped standard error. Panel (c) replicates panel (b) of ﬁgure 4 and
then additionally shows estimated reoﬀending levels and treatment eﬀects which are estimated
within covariate cells, obtained by estimating parameters via extrapolation for each group and
then aggregating up, weighting each group by its sample share. See appendix ﬁgure C-3 for a
graphical depiction of the within-group extrapolations underlying the treatment eﬀect estimates in
panel (c).
43
Figure 6: Extrapolation estimates by oﬀending history
(a) Extrapolation estimates
.4
.425
.45
.475
.5
.2
.225
.25
.275
.3
Pr(Reoffend)
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Ofﬁcer Stringency
No Past Offense (Left Axis)
Any Past Offense (Right Axis)
(b) Treatment eﬀect estimates
.35
.4
.45
.5
.15
.2
.25
.3
Pr(Reoffend)
All Motorists
Treated
Untreated
No Past Offense (Left Axis)
Any Past Offense (Right Axis)
Notes: Same as ﬁgure 4 except estimates are shown separately for motorists with (51.3 percent)
and without (48.7 percent) at least one traﬃc citation in the past two years. As described in the
text, we use a two-year lookback period because two years of pre-stop data are available for all
citations in our main sample. Note that the estimates for motorists with and without past oﬀenses
are shown using diﬀerent axes for ease of exposition (because reoﬀending rates are much higher
for those with past oﬀenses). The estimates illustrated in panel (b) are also reported in appendix
table C-2, and alternative versions of these estimates using a local mean estimator for E(Yi1) and
E(Yi0) are presented in appendix table C-3.
44
FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION: APPENDICES
A
Stringency Instrument
A-1
Evidence that bunching represents oﬃcer behavior
Here we discuss additional evidence that the bunching in the distribution of charge speeds
presented in ﬁgure 1 is the result of discretionary behavior by oﬃcers. Figure 1 shows that
about 25 percent of oﬃcers almost never write tickets for exactly nine MPH over the limit.
Moving beyond a binary split of oﬃcers, ﬁgure A-1 illustrates signiﬁcant variation across
oﬃcers in the propensity to bunch drivers. Panel (a) demonstrates full support across oﬃcers
in bunching propensity, while panel (b) shows that this variation persists after netting out
location and time ﬁxed eﬀects. Such variation is inconsistent with bunching due to driver
behavior; if drivers systematically bunch below ﬁne increases, then oﬃcers patrolling the
same beat-shift should exhibit a similar degree of bunching.
However, this across-oﬃcer variation could alternatively be due to noise or estimation
error. To conﬁrm that the across-oﬃcer variation in bunching propensity is “true” variation
(in a statistical sense), we estimate the following regression:
1[bunchijs] = γXi + ψs + αj + uijs
where i indexes citations, j indexes oﬃcers, and s indexes beat-shifts; Xi is a vector of driver
covariates, ψs is a beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀect, and αj is an oﬃcer ﬁxed eﬀect.13 This regression
has an R2 = 0.55, with 0.32 (58 percent) attributable to the oﬃcer eﬀects, 0.22 (41 percent)
attributable to the beat-shift eﬀects, and less than one percent attributable to the driver X’s.
In other words, the identity of the citing oﬃcer is signiﬁcantly more predictive of a bunched
citation than the beat-shift of the stop or the full set of driver characteristics. Moreover,
there is signiﬁcant variation in the estimated ˆαj’s (σ2 = 0.076). Applying Empirical Bayes
shrinkage (Morris, 1983) to adjust for estimation error has minimal impact on the dispersion
of the estimated oﬃcer eﬀects (σ2 = 0.71). See panel (c) of ﬁgure A-1 for further details.
Finally, we show in ﬁgure A-2 that an oﬃcer’s bunching propensity is highly correlated
across space and time. First, we randomly partition an oﬃcer’s citations into two location
(county) groups and regress an oﬃcer’s bunching propensity, adjusted for beat-shift ﬁxed
eﬀects, in one set of locations on the same oﬃcer’s adjusted bunching propensity in the
other set of locations. This regression yields ˆβ = 0.68 (se = 0.02). Next, we split an oﬃcer’s
citations in half temporally and perform the same exercise, which gives ˆβ = 0.85 (se = 0.01).
13The ψ’s are the same ﬁxed eﬀects we use in our main analysis, described in section 3. They
are at the level of county × 1[highway] × year × month × 1[weekend] × shift.
45
Figure A-1: Across-Oﬃcer Distribution of Bunching Propensity
(a) Raw Bunching Propensity
0
.1
.2
.3
Fraction of Ofﬁcers
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Bunching Propensity (Raw)
(b) Adjusted Bunching Propensity
0
.02
.04
.06
.08
.1
Fraction of Ofﬁcers
-.5
0
.5
Bunching Propensity (Residualized)
(c) Estimated Oﬃcer Eﬀects
Raw: σ2 = 0.076
EB: σ2 = 0.071
0
.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Density
-1
-.5
0
.5
1
Estimated Ofﬁcer Effect
Raw Effects
Empirical Bayes
Notes: Panel (a) plots the oﬃcer-level distribution of the share of tickets bunched. Panel (b) plots
the oﬃcer-level distribution of bunching propensity, residualized of beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀects. Panel
(c) reports estimated oﬃcer eﬀects from a regression of 1[bunchijs] on oﬃcer ﬁxed eﬀects, beat-
shift ﬁxed eﬀects, and the full set of driver covariates, as described in section 2.4. The solid blue
illustrates the distribution of raw oﬃcer eﬀects and the dashed green line illustrates the distribution
of eﬀects after applying Empirical Bayes shrinkage (Morris, 1983).
46
Figure A-2: Within-Oﬃcer Correlation in Bunching Propensity
(a) Locations
Unweighted: β = 0.679 (0.022)
Weighted: β = 0.737 (0.031)
-1
-.5
0
.5
1
Second Partition
-1
-.5
0
.5
1
First Partition
(b) Time Periods
Unweighted: β = 0.849 (0.013)
Weighted: β = 0.883 (0.020)
-1
-.5
0
.5
1
Second Partition
-1
-.5
0
.5
1
First Partition
Notes: Each circle corresponds to an oﬃcer. Dashed red line is the 45-degree line. This ﬁgure splits
each oﬃcer’s sample of citations into two groups and illustrates the correlation in (residualized)
bunching propensity across groups. In panel (a), the groups are constructed as location partitions,
with each partition comprised of half of an oﬃcer’s patrol locations. In panel (b), the groups are
constructed as time partitions, with the x and y-axes corresponding to the oﬃcer’s ﬁrst and second
half of tickets over time, respectively. Each ﬁgure reports the raw linear regression coeﬃcient as
well as the linear regression coeﬃcient when weighting by the total number of citations. Another
way to note the stability over time in an oﬃcer’s bunching propensity is to regress 1[bunchijs] on
beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀects, oﬃcer ﬁxed eﬀects, and a quadratic in oﬃcer experience (in months). The
p-value on each experience term is > 0.45 and the joint test p-value = 0.7855. In other words, after
conditioning on oﬃcer identity, there is no experience proﬁle in the likelihood of a bunched ticket.
47
Table A-1: Relationship between Lenience and Oﬃcer Characteristics
Binary
Continuous
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Mean
Lenient
Raw
Adjusted
Weighted
Female
0.0893
-0.0704
-0.0508
-0.0356
-0.00340
(0.0366)
(0.0266)
(0.0161)
(0.00388)
Race = Black
0.143
-0.0916
-0.0289
-0.00799
0.00550
(0.0297)
(0.0231)
(0.0142)
(0.00291)
Race = Hispanic
0.169
-0.0933
-0.0771
0.0117
0.00921
(0.0693)
(0.0564)
(0.0359)
(0.00707)
Race = Other
0.191
-0.0120
-0.0193
-0.0186
-0.00135
(0.0655)
(0.0544)
(0.0350)
(0.00724)
Age
34.06
-0.0203
-0.0236
0.00982
0.00741
(0.0561)
(0.0478)
(0.0288)
(0.00631)
Experience
7.09
-0.117
-0.0778
-0.0345
-0.000936
(0.0388)
(0.0324)
(0.0214)
(0.00616)
Any College
0.319
-0.00798
-0.0114
-0.00229
0.00490
(0.0213)
(0.0171)
(0.0108)
(0.00279)
Mean
—
0.753
0.353
0.005
0.006
Oﬃcers
1960
1960
1960
1960
1958
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Age and experience are in years/10 and are com-
puted as of January 2007. Raw lenience is the fraction of an oﬃcer’s tickets that are bunched and
adjusted lenience is the fraction of an oﬃcer’s tickets that are bunched, residualized of location-time
ﬁxed eﬀects. In column 4, the regression is weighted by one over the variance of adjusted lenience.
Regressions also included quadratic terms in age and experience, which are are statistically insignif-
icant in all cases.
48
Table A-2: Randomization Test
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Reoﬀend
Harsh Fine
Stringency
1[Stringent]
Female
-0.0645
-0.0233
-0.00119
-0.00161
(0.000840)
(0.00173)
(0.000928)
(0.00130)
Age
-0.00631
-0.00229
0.000280
0.000540
(0.000151)
(0.000273)
(0.000172)
(0.000257)
Age Squared
0.0000190
0.0000151
-0.00000303
-0.00000586
(0.00000168)
(0.00000268)
(0.00000166)
(0.00000259)
Race = Black
0.0710
0.0202
-0.000326
-0.00407
(0.00127)
(0.00270)
(0.00176)
(0.00242)
Race = Hispanic
0.0324
0.0345
0.00633
-0.000643
(0.00117)
(0.00290)
(0.00212)
(0.00295)
Race = Other
0.000888
0.0348
0.00581
-0.00101
(0.00202)
(0.00274)
(0.00176)
(0.00250)
Race = Unknown
0.0120
0.00505
0.00377
-0.00131
(0.00299)
(0.00550)
(0.00266)
(0.00374)
Prior Prison Spell
0.139
0.0107
-0.00315
-0.000259
(0.00393)
(0.00359)
(0.00207)
(0.00275)
County Resident
0.00583
-0.0186
-0.00586
0.00310
(0.00127)
(0.00309)
(0.00265)
(0.00441)
Log Zip Income
-0.0161
0.0103
0.00486
0.00180
(0.000992)
(0.00211)
(0.00164)
(0.00194)
Log Vehicle Price
-0.00846
0.0199
0.00487
0.00159
(0.000992)
(0.00160)
(0.00122)
(0.00191)
Speeding Past Year
0.127
0.0247
0.000948
-0.000595
(0.00103)
(0.00157)
(0.000653)
(0.00110)
Other Past Year
0.154
0.0149
-0.000758
-0.00201
(0.00103)
(0.00115)
(0.000727)
(0.00118)
Crash Past Year
0.0393
0.00736
0.000990
-0.000721
(0.00148)
(0.00132)
(0.000769)
(0.00113)
Mean
.351
.658
.658
.763
F-Stat
5883.84
28.8
2.7
.92
F-test
<.0001
<.0001
.0002
.5484
Beat-Shift FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Oﬃcers
1960
1960
1960
1960
Observations
1693457
1693457
1693457
1693457
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the oﬃcer-level in parentheses. Regressions also include indi-
cators for missing age (<1%), missing zip code income (≈10%), and missing vehicle information
(≈14%); joint signiﬁcance tests include these variables.
49
Table A-3: First Stage Estimates Across Subsamples
Subgroup
(1)
(2)
= 1
= 0
Female
0.970
0.928
(0.007)
(0.007)
Age > 30
0.957
0.927
(0.007)
(0.007)
Race = White
0.954
0.934
(0.008)
(0.007)
Race = Black
0.922
0.948
(0.010)
(0.006)
Race = Hispanic
0.923
0.948
(0.008)
(0.007)
Race = Other
0.916
0.945
(0.015)
(0.006)
Race = Unknown
0.964
0.941
(0.016)
(0.007)
County Resident
0.972
0.925
(0.007)
(0.007)
Zip Income > $50,000
0.946
0.942
(0.007)
(0.007)
Vehicle > $20,000
0.916
0.953
(0.009)
(0.006)
Citation Past Year
0.913
0.961
(0.007)
(0.007)
Notes: This table reports ﬁrst stage estimates for subsamples. Each coeﬃcient is from a separate
regression of 1[harsh] on the stringency instrument and beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀects using only the
denoted subgroup of drivers, where the subgroups are the groups for which the denoted indicator
variable = 1 (column 1) and = 0 (column 2).
Standard errors clustered at the oﬃcer-level in
parentheses. For reference, the ﬁrst stage estimate in the full sample is β = 0.944 (0.006).
50
Figure A-3: First Stage Estimates, Sanction Measures
(a) Statutory Fine Amount
β = 1.223 (0.012)
F =  10282
0
.05
.1
.15
Fraction of Citations
-.75
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
.75
Pr(Harsh Fine)
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Local Mean
Nonparametric Fit
95% CI
(b) Paid Fine Amount
β = 0.958 (0.014)
F =   4591
0
.05
.1
.15
Fraction of Citations
-.75
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
.75
Pr(Harsh Fine)
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Local Mean
Nonparametric Fit
95% CI
(c) Statutory DL Points
β = 0.715 (0.014)
F =   2611
0
.05
.1
.15
Fraction of Citations
-.75
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
.75
Pr(Harsh Fine)
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Local Mean
Nonparametric Fit
95% CI
(d) Accrued DL Points
β = -0.036 (0.016)
F =      5
0
.05
.1
.15
Fraction of Citations
-.75
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
.75
Pr(Harsh Fine)
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Local Mean
Nonparametric Fit
95% CI
Notes: Each panel shows an identical to panel (c) of ﬁgure 2 but replaces the outcome variable with
a diﬀerent sanctions measure. In panel (a), the outcome is the statutory ﬁne based on the charged
speed. In panel (b), the outcome is the eﬀective ﬁne amount, taking into account the ex-post court
outcomes of oﬀenders. In panel (c), the outcome is statutory driver license points based on the
points schedule. In panel (d), the outcome is accrued DL points, taking into account the ex-post
court outcomes of oﬀenders. See appendix section D-1 for details on the computation of eﬀective
sanction measures (paid ﬁnes and accrued points).
51
B
Deterrence eﬀects
Table B-1: Naive OLS Estimates
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Reoﬀend
Reoﬀend
Reoﬀend
Reoﬀend
Fine ($100s)
0.0426
0.0548
0.0228
0.0286
(0.00241)
(0.00178)
(0.00160)
(0.00127)
Mean
0.325
0.325
0.325
0.325
Controls
No
No
Yes
Yes
Oﬃcer FE
No
Yes
No
Yes
Beat-Shift FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
1693457
1693457
1693457
1693457
Notes:
Standard errors clustered at the oﬃcer-level in parentheses.
Dependent variable is an
indicator for a new traﬃc oﬀense in the next year. The reported mean is the mean for drivers cited
at 9 MPH over the limit.
52
Figure B-1: Reduced Form Estimates
(a) Any Violation
βRF = -0.0167 (0.0053)
μ = 0.347
-.015
-.01
-.005
0
.005
.01
.015
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Local Mean
Linear Fit
Nonparametric Fit
95% CI
(b) Speeding Violation
βRF = -0.0138 (0.0034)
μ = 0.170
-.015
-.01
-.005
0
.005
.01
.015
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Local Mean
Linear Fit
Nonparametric Fit
95% CI
(c) Crash Involvement
βRF = -0.0027 (0.0014)
μ = 0.080
-.004
-.002
0
.002
.004
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Local Mean
Linear Fit
Nonparametric Fit
95% CI
(d) Contested Citation
βRF = 0.1062 (0.0063)
μ = 0.262
-.075
-.05
-.025
0
.025
.05
.075
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Local Mean
Linear Fit
Nonparametric Fit
95% CI
Notes: Same as ﬁgure A-3 except for reduced form outcomes.
53
Figure B-2: Dynamic Reduced Form Estimates
-.015
-.01
-.005
0
.005
.01
.015
Reduced Form Estimate
-8
-4
0
4
8
Quarter Around FHP Citation
Any Violation
Speeding Violation
Crash
Notes: Same as ﬁgure 3 using any moving violation in a given quarter (blue circles), any speeding
violation in a given quarter (green diamonds), and any crash involvement in a given quarter (purple
x’s) as the outcome variable. Shaded regions denote 95 percent conﬁdence intervals obtained from
standard errors clustered at the oﬃcer-level.
54
Table B-2: First Stage and Reduced Form Estimates
(1)
(2)
(3)
Lenient Mean
β
β
Panel A: First Stage
Harsh Fine
0.5573
0.9441
0.9432
(0.0064)
(0.0064)
Fine Amount
194.308
122.340
122.210
(1.206)
(1.190)
Fine Amount (Paid)
167.187
95.819
96.066
(1.414)
(1.406)
DL Points
3.416
0.7152
0.7142
(0.0140)
(0.0138)
DL Points (Accrued)
1.684
-0.0362
-0.0273
(0.0164)
(0.0154)
Panel B: Reduced Form
Any Violation
0.3471
-0.0167
-0.0150
(0.0053)
(0.0034)
Speeding Violation
0.1702
-0.0138
-0.0136
(0.0034)
(0.0025)
Other Violation
0.2563
-0.0112
-0.0092
(0.0045)
(0.0028)
Moving Violation
0.2801
-0.0135
-0.0128
(0.0047)
(0.0031)
Non-Moving Violation
0.1602
-0.0117
-0.0097
(0.0035)
(0.0022)
Crash Involvement
0.0799
-0.0027
-0.0020
(0.0014)
(0.0011)
Contest in Court
0.2620
0.1062
0.1031
(0.0063)
(0.0060)
Controls
No
Yes
Beat-Shift FE
Yes
Yes
Oﬃcers
1960
1960
Observations
1693457
1693457
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the oﬃcer-level in parentheses. This table reports ﬁrst stage
and reduced form regression estimates with and without covariates.
Each coeﬃcient is from a
separate regression of the denoted outcome on the stringency instrument and beat-shift eﬀects,
with (column 2) and without (column 3) controls
55
Figure B-3: Robustness, Sample Selection
(a) Trimming Oﬃcers
-.025
-.02
-.015
-.01
-.005
0
.005
.01
0
5
10
15
20
25
Percentile of Ofﬁcers Trimmed
IV Estimate
95% CI
(b) Selection Correction
βIV = -0.0177 (0.0018)
-.015
-.01
-.005
0
.005
.01
.015
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Local Mean
Linear Fit
Nonparametric Fit
95% CI
(c) GPS FE
βIV = -0.0140 (0.0069)
-.015
-.01
-.005
0
.005
.01
.015
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Local Mean
Linear Fit
Nonparametric Fit
95% CI
Notes: For comparison, our main IV estimate is βIV = −0.0177 (0.0017). Panel (a) shows the
sensitivity of our IV estimate to trimming oﬃcers with the most selected samples. Panel (b) plots
the reduced form and reports the IV estimate using a Heckman (1979) selection correction based on
oﬃcer ticketing frequency. Panel (c) plots the reduced form and reports the IV estimate using GPS
road segment ﬁxed eﬀects for the subset of citations including GPS coordinates (N = 244, 858).
56
Table B-3: Robustness, Alternative Instruments
F-Stat
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Instrument
N
Balance
FS
βIV
Leave-out
1693457
2.702
21966
-0.0159
0.0016
Leave-Out (Residualized)
1693457
2.691
25278
-0.0191
0.0016
Leave-County-Out
1500479
1.475
626
-0.0176
0.0024
Binary
1693457
0.921
289
-0.0268
0.0039
Oﬃcer Dummies
1693404
2.778
323
-0.0183
0.0016
Within Demographics
Race
1689414
5.111
24453
-0.0168
0.0016
Race × Gender × Age
1651212
4.579
21505
-0.0176
0.0016
Race × Gender × Age × History
1587971
5.175
18469
-0.0182
0.0017
Race × Gender × Age × History × Income
1471826
3.884
14912
-0.0189
0.0017
Notes: This table shows how results vary under diﬀerent computations of the stringency instrument.
Columns 2 and 3 report F-statistics associated with a joint balance test and the ﬁrst stage; column
4 reports the IV estimate for one-year speeding recidivism. Row 1 reports results corresponding
to the main instrument. In row 2, the instrument is the leave-out-mean after residualizing out
beat-shift eﬀects (e.g., Dobbie et al. 2018). Row 3 computes the instrument as the leave-county-
out mean.
Row 4 uses a binary instrument and row 5 uses the full set of oﬃcer dummies as
instruments. Rows 6-9 show results when the instrument is computed as the leave-out mean within
demographic cells, deﬁned according to four race groups (white, Black, Hispanic, other/unknown),
gender, 1[age≥35], 1[any citation in past year] and 1[zip code income ≥$50,000]. Regressions
using the by-group instrument also include ﬁxed eﬀects at the relevant demographic cell-level.
57
Figure B-4: IV Estimate Heterogeneity by Driver Characteristics
Lenient Mean
IV Estimate
Citation Past Year
Zip Income > 50K
County Resident
Race = White
Age > 30
Female
Citation Past Year
Zip Income > 50K
County Resident
Race = White
Age > 30
Female
.2
.3
.4
.5
= 1
= 0
Notes: This ﬁgures shows heterogeneity in IV estimates for one-year recidivism by driver charac-
teristics. Each characteristic is denoted as a binary category; the x’s plot lenient means for the
category = 1 subgroup and the o’s plot lenient means for the category = 0 subgroup. Arrows point-
ing away from the means indicate the IV estimate, and shaded region around the arrow denotes
the 95 percent conﬁdence interval. Vertical dashed line denotes the lenient oﬃcer mean recidivism
rate for the full sample.
58
Figure B-5: Evidence of Driver Learning
(a) Exposure to Stringent Oﬃcers
Exposed: βIV = -0.016 (0.009)
Unexposed: βIV = -0.021 (0.005)
Δ = 0.005 (0.009)
-.02
-.01
0
.01
.02
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Exposure
No Exposure
(b) Reoﬀense Locations
Same: βIV = -0.019 (0.001)
Other: βIV = -0.003 (0.002)
Δ = -0.016 (0.002)
-.015
-.0075
0
.0075
.015
-.5
-.25
0
.25
.5
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Same County
Other County
Notes: Panel (a) illustrates reduced form relationships and reports IV estimates for motorists
with and without past exposure to stringent (non-bunching) oﬃcers. To mitigate selection issues
resulting from the fact that past exposure to stringency reduces the likelihood a driver reappears
in the data, we focus on exposure at least one year in the past because treatment eﬀects fade out
after one year (see ﬁgure 3) . Speciﬁcally, we take the subset of drivers with an FHP-issued citation
at least one year prior and compare treatment eﬀects for those with and without past tickets issued
by stringent oﬃcers. In panel (b), we report treatment eﬀects of harsh ﬁnes on the likelihood that
drivers reoﬀend in the same county they were ticketed and in diﬀerent counties from the one they
were ticketed in. Both panels report the estimated diﬀerence (and associated standard error) in
treatment eﬀects.
59
B-1
Additional robustness: monotonicity
In addition to the result that average monotonicity is suﬃcient for 2SLS estimates in ex-
aminer designs, Frandsen et al. (2019) also provide a test for the joint assumptions of strict
monotonicity and exclusion. We were unable to use their code due to computing constraints,
but here we provide an ad-hoc version of their test. Speciﬁcally, our version replicates the
“ﬁt” component of their test by ﬂexibly ﬁtting reoﬀending rates to the stringency instrument
(conditional on beat-shift eﬀects), computing residuals, and then testing the ability of oﬃcer
eﬀects to explain the residuals. We focus only on the “ﬁt” component of the test at the
suggestion of the authors, who note that the “slope” component is unpowered with many
judges (as there are in our setting, N = 1, 960).
Because we do not account for estimation error in the construction of the residuals, our
ad-hoc version of the test yields a p-value which is biased towards zero. In other words,
we will over-reject the joint null hypothesis of monotonicity and exclusion. Hence, while
qualitatively useful, our version of the test is somewhat challenging to interpret. We depict
the results of this Frandsen et al. (2019) test graphically below. The joint test statistic,
which summarizes the ability of oﬃcer ﬁxed eﬀects to explain the residuals, is F = 2.3. On
the one hand, this test statistic is reassuringly small; on the other hand, the (biased) p-value
suggests that deviations from exclusion and strict monotonicity could be a salient concern
for our empirical results.
The above ﬁgure also notes that the outcome of this test hinges on a relatively small share
of oﬃcers. Speciﬁcally, if we drop the top 12 percent of oﬃcers in terms of their associated
t-statistics in the second stage regression of the residuals on the oﬃcer ﬁxed eﬀects, the joint
F-statistic falls to F = 1.03, with a biased-downward p = 0.172. To that end, in table B-4
below, we replicate our main speciﬁc deterrence estimate using only the subsample of oﬃcers
passing the Frandsen et al. (2019) test, ﬁnding similar 2SLS estimates.
In table B-4, we also show 2SLS estimates which recompute oﬃcer stringency within 32
motorist covariate cells in column 2 (same as row 8 of table B-3), which estimate eﬀects
separately for 16 oﬃcer covariate cells (gender × 1[white] × 1[any college] × 1[experienced])
and then aggregates up, weighting by sample shares in column 3, and a combined version of
columns 2 and 3 in column 4. The speciﬁcation in column 4 only requires monotonicity to
hold within each combination of motorist and oﬃcer characteristics.
60
Figure B-6: Fit Test from Frandsen et al. (2019)
Full Sample:
F = 2.288 (p < 0.001)
Drop 12% of Ofﬁcers:
F = 1.032 (p = 0.172)
-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2
Pr(Reoffend)
-.7
-.35
0
.35
.7
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Notes: This ﬁgure illustrates results of the joint test of monotonicity and exclusion from Frandsen
et al. (2019). Each circle (or square) represents an oﬃcer (N = 1, 960) and plots the oﬃcer’s average
stringency and reoﬀending rates, residualized of covariates and beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀects. Green line
denotes a non-parametric ﬁt and the ﬁgure reports the results of computing residuals from the
non-parametric ﬁt, regressing the residuals on oﬃcer dummies, and performing a joint signiﬁcance
test.
61
Table B-4: Monotonicity robustness for IV estimates
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Baseline
Driver Cells
Oﬃcer Cells
Both
Full Sample
-0.0177
-0.0183
-0.0164
-0.0179
(0.0056)
(0.0038)
(0.0038)
(0.0037)
FLL Oﬃcers
-0.0152
-0.0164
-0.0152
-0.0166
(0.0037)
(0.0026)
(0.0025)
(0.0025)
Notes: This table reports 2SLS estimates. The outcome variable is any new traﬃc oﬀense in the
following year. In column 1, we use our baseline leave-out stringency measure. In column 2, we
use a stringency measure which is computed separately for each of 32 motorist covariate cells. In
column 3, we estimate a 2SLS coeﬃcient separately for each of 16 oﬃcer cells and then compute
the weighted average of the coeﬃcients, weighting by sample shares. In column 4, we repeat the
exercise in column 3 using the cell-speciﬁc stringency instrument from column 2. In the second
row, we drop the 12 percent of oﬃcers indicated in table B-6 (N oﬃcers = 1, 725, N = 1, 314, 635).
In columns 3 and 4, we compute standard errors using a Bayesian bootstrap, clustered at the
oﬃcer-level.
62
C
Extrapolation estimates
Figure C-1: Common Support of Oﬃcer Stringency Instrument
Pr(D | p=1) = 0.995
Pr(D | p=0) = 0.021
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
Fraction of Sample
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Propensity Score
Treated
Untreated
Notes: Figure plots the distribution of propensity scores for the treated (66%) and untreated (34%)
subsets of sample, where treatment is deﬁned as 1[harsh]. Following the text, the propensity score
is estimated from a linear regression of 1[harsh] on oﬃcer stringency and beat-shift ﬁxed eﬀects.
63
Figure C-2: Extrapolation under diﬀerent functional forms
.33
.34
.35
.36
.37
.38
Pr(Reoffend)
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Quartic
Tail Mean: 10%
8th Order
Tail Mean: 5%
Piecewise Linear
Tail Mean: 1%
Notes: This ﬁgure illustrates extrapolation estimates of the sample E(Yi0) and E(Yi1) under diﬀer-
ent functional forms. Gray circles illustrates a binscatter and green solid line shows the quadratic
ﬁt (both are the same as ﬁgure 4). Orange dotted line presents a quartic ﬁt, maroon dashed line
shows an 8th order polynomial, and purple long-dashed line shows a piecewise linear ﬁt based on a
bin width of 0.2. Gold triangles, maroon diamons, and pink squares show the beat-shift adjusted
averages for oﬃcers with Z < 0.1 and Z > 0.9, Z < 0.05 and Z > 0.95, and Z < 0.01 and Z > 0.99,
respectively.
64
Figure C-3: Within-group extrapolation estimates
(a) By driver covariates
.33
.34
.35
.36
.37
.38
Pr(Reoffend)
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Add Cov: Binscatter
Add Controls: Quadratic Fit
Separate by Cov: Binscatter
Separate by Cov: Quadratic Fit
(b) By stop locations
.33
.34
.35
.36
.37
.38
Pr(Reoffend)
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Troops: Binscatter
Troops: Quartic Fit
FM: Binscatter
FM: Quartic Fit
FM: Quantiles
(c) Treatment eﬀects
.28
.3
.32
.34
.36
.38
Pr(Reoffend)
All Motorists
Treated
Untreated
Baseline
Within Covariates
Within Troops
Within Locations
Notes:
In both panels, gray dots and green solid line represent our baseline binscatter
and baseline quadratic ﬁt, as in ﬁgure 4.
Panel (a) illustrates extrapolation estimates ad-
justed for driver covariates, parameterized as 32 categories (gender × race × 1[age ≥35] ×
1[any citation in the past year]). Red circles and dashed line show the binscatter and quadratic ﬁt
when also conditioning on these cell ﬁxed eﬀects, while the purple diamonds and dashed line show
the binscatter and quadratic ﬁt when estimating separately for each driver group and then aggre-
gating up, weighting by sample shares. Panel (b) illustrates extrapolation estimates constructed
within-locations. Red circle and dashed line show the binscatter and quadratic ﬁt when estimating
separately by troop and then aggregating up, weighting by sample shares. Purple dots and dashed
line show the binscatter and quadratic ﬁt when using the within-locations approach of Feigenberg
& Miller (2022), described in appendix E-1. Orange squares illustrate the binscatter corresponding
to the within-location quantiles approach of Feigenberg & Miller (2022). Panel (c) replicates panel
(b) of ﬁgure 4, illustrating treatment eﬀects based on the within-group extrapolations depicted in
panels (a) and (b).
65
Figure C-4: Extrapolation via local linear regression, Arnold et al. (2022) approach
Extrapolation Estimates:
E(Y0) = 0.363 (0.013)
E(Y1) = 0.342 (0.007)
ATT = -0.018 (0.019)
ATU = -0.025 (0.019)
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
Pr(Reoffend)
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Ofﬁcer Estimate
Binscatter
Nonparametric ﬁt
Notes: This ﬁgure illustrates extrapolated estimates of E(Yi0) and E(Yi1), as well as reports the
associated ATT and ATU estimates, when using the local linear regression approach to extrapola-
tion from Arnold et al. (2022). Speciﬁcally, for outcome Y =1[one year reoﬀending], we estimate the
regression Yijs = αj + ψs + uijs and construct oﬃcer-level estimates θY
j = ˆαj + E( ˆψs).
We then do
the same procedure, replacing the outcome with D = 1[harsh ﬁne] to get oﬃcer level estimates θD
j .
The ﬁgure plots the estimated θY
j ’s (vertical axis) against the estimated θD
j ’s (horizontal axis) in
the small gray dots. We then ﬁt the θY
j ’s to the θD
j ’s using a local linear regression with a guassian
kernel and rule-of-thumb bandwidth = 0.1, weighting by each oﬃcer’s number of stops, and use
the ﬁtted values at θD
j = 0 and θD
j = 1 as our estimates of E(Yi0) and E(Yi1). For inference, we
use a bootstrap clustered at the oﬃcer-level.
66
Figure C-5: Extrapolation estimates for other outcomes
(a) Any oﬀense
.34
.35
.36
.37
.38
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Binscatter
Quadratic Fit
Tail Mean: 5%
(b) Any speeding oﬀense
.165
.17
.175
.18
.185
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Binscatter
Quadratic Fit
Tail Mean: 5%
(c) Any crash
.076
.078
.08
.082
.084
.086
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Binscatter
Quadratic Fit
Tail Mean: 5%
(d) Number oﬀenses
1.2
1.25
1.3
1.35
1.4
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Binscatter
Quadratic Fit
Tail Mean: 5%
(e) Number speeding
.37
.38
.39
.4
.41
.42
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Binscatter
Quadratic Fit
Tail Mean: 5%
(f) Number crashes
.15
.155
.16
.165
.17
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Binscatter
Quadratic Fit
Tail Mean: 5%
Notes: This ﬁgure graphically depicts the extrapolation estimates underlying tables 4 and C-1.
Each panel is the same as panel (a) of ﬁgure 4 for a diﬀerent outcome. In panels (a)-c(c), the
outcome is whether a motorist reoﬀends in the following year. In panels (d)-(f), the outcome is
the number of oﬀenses in the following two years. Red diamonds depict the 5 percent tail mean
estimates of E(Yi0) and E(Yi1) used to construct the estimates reported in table C-1.
67
Table C-1: Extrapolation estimates for other outcomes
(using 5 percent tail mean estimates)
Y0
Y1 −Y0
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
All
D = 1
D = 0
Diﬀ
All
D = 1
D = 0
Diﬀ
(ATE)
(ATT)
(ATU)
Panel A: Any oﬀense in following year
Any Oﬀense
0.353
0.367
0.325
0.042
-0.010
-0.003
-0.024
0.021
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.003)
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.013)
Speeding
0.179
0.188
0.161
0.027
-0.013
-0.011
-0.017
0.006
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.002)
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.008)
Crash
0.078
0.078
0.077
0.001
0.001
0.004
-0.005
0.009
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.001)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.004)
Panel B: Number of oﬀenses in following two years
Any Oﬀense
1.275
1.357
1.118
0.239
-0.037
-0.000
-0.107
0.107
(0.027)
(0.040)
(0.016)
(0.044)
(0.031)
(0.043)
(0.051)
(0.072)
Speeding
0.395
0.416
0.355
0.061
-0.023
-0.014
-0.039
0.024
(0.008)
(0.013)
(0.004)
(0.014)
(0.010)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.021)
Crash
0.155
0.157
0.151
0.006
0.003
0.007
-0.005
0.012
(0.003)
(0.005)
(0.002)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.008)
Notes: Same as table 4 except that we use the beat-adjusted average outcomes for oﬃcers with
Z < 0.05 and Z > 0.95 as our estimates of E(Yi0) and E(Yi1) instead of our baseline quadratic
extrapolation speciﬁcation of equation 1.
68
Figure C-6: Extrapolation estimates by oﬃcer experience
(a) Extrapolation: reoﬀending
.33
.34
.35
.36
.37
.38
Pr(Reoffend)
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Low Experience
High Experience
(b) Treatment eﬀects: reoﬀending
.28
.3
.32
.34
.36
.38
Pr(Reoffend)
All Motorists
Treated
Untreated
Low Experience
High Experience
(c) Extrapolation: contest in court
.2
.25
.3
.35
Pr(Contest)
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Ofﬁcer Stringency
Low Experience
High Experience
(d) Treatment eﬀects: contest in court
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
Pr(Contest)
All Motorists
Treated
Untreated
Low Experience
High Experience
Notes: Same as ﬁgure 4 except estimates are shown separately for oﬃcers with at least ﬁve years
experience as FHP patrol oﬃcers as of January 1, 2007 (the start of our sample). In panels (a) and
(b), the outcome of interest is whether a motorist commits a new traﬃc oﬀense in the following year
and in panels (c) and (d), the outcome of interest is whether a motorist contests a citation in traﬃc
court. Treatment eﬀect estimates shown in panels (b) and (d) are constructed from the quadratic
extrapolations of E(Yi0) and E(Yi1) shown in panels (a) and (c). The estimates illustrated in panels
(b) and (c) are also reported in appendix table C-2, and alternative versions of these estimates using
a local mean estimator for E(Yi1) and E(Yi0) are presented in appendix table C-3.
69
Table C-2: Extrapolation estimates by subgroup
Y0
Y1 −Y0
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
All
D = 1
D = 0
Diﬀ
All
D = 1
D = 0
Diﬀ
(ATE)
(ATT)
(ATU)
Panel A: By motorist oﬀense history (prior two years)
No oﬀense
0.246
0.258
0.225
0.033
-0.018
-0.013
-0.026
0.013
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.002)
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.010)
Any oﬀense
0.463
0.476
0.435
0.041
-0.010
-0.007
-0.018
0.011
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.011)
Panel B: By oﬃcer experience
Low
0.355
0.375
0.319
0.055
-0.017
-0.012
-0.024
0.012
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.004)
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.011)
(0.016)
High
0.358
0.370
0.333
0.037
-0.008
-0.002
-0.019
0.017
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.005)
(0.010)
(0.007)
(0.010)
(0.012)
(0.017)
Panel B: By oﬃcer experience (Y = Pr(contest))
Low
0.235
0.243
0.221
0.023
0.096
0.090
0.106
-0.015
(0.006)
(0.011)
(0.013)
(0.022)
(0.006)
(0.018)
(0.031)
(0.047)
High
0.210
0.204
0.223
-0.019
0.110
0.107
0.115
-0.008
(0.008)
(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.025)
(0.009)
(0.021)
(0.033)
(0.051)
Notes:
This table reports estimated untreated reoﬀending levels E(Yi0) and treatment eﬀects
E(Yi1 −Yi0) for all motorists, treated motorists, and untreated motorists, using diﬀerent speciﬁca-
tions for obtaining extrapolated estimates of E(Yi0) and E(Yi1). In panel (a), we show estimates
from estimating equation 1 with diﬀerent polynomials in Z. In panel (b), we estimate equation
Z using a piecewise linear speciﬁcation with rule-of-thumb bandwidth = 0.2.
In panel (c), we
show estimates that use the beat-shift adjusted average Y for oﬃcers in the tails of the stringency
distribution, with bw denoting the bandwidth used to deﬁne the tails. In panel (d), we present
estimates from polynomial speciﬁcations of 1 that replace Z with the estimated propensity score.
Graphical analogues for the underlying extrapolation estimates are shown in ﬁgure C-2.
70
Table C-3: Extrapolation estimates by subgroup
(using 5 percent tail mean estimates)
Y0
Y1 −Y0
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
All
D = 1
D = 0
Diﬀ
All
D = 1
D = 0
Diﬀ
(ATE)
(ATT)
(ATU)
Panel A: By motorist oﬀense history (prior two years)
No oﬀense
0.247
0.260
0.225
0.035
-0.020
-0.015
-0.029
0.014
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.002)
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.010)
Any oﬀense
0.458
0.468
0.435
0.032
-0.004
0.002
-0.017
0.019
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.003)
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.013)
Panel B: By oﬃcer experience
Low
0.347
0.363
0.319
0.043
-0.009
-0.000
-0.024
0.023
(0.006)
(0.010)
(0.004)
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.010)
(0.013)
(0.016)
High
0.361
0.374
0.333
0.042
-0.011
-0.007
-0.020
0.013
(0.009)
(0.013)
(0.005)
(0.014)
(0.010)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.020)
Panel B: By oﬃcer experience (Y = Pr(contest))
Low
0.242
0.254
0.221
0.033
0.087
0.080
0.101
-0.021
(0.007)
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.023)
(0.008)
(0.019)
(0.031)
(0.047)
High
0.218
0.215
0.223
-0.008
0.102
0.096
0.115
-0.019
(0.008)
(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.026)
(0.010)
(0.022)
(0.033)
(0.052)
Notes: Same as table C-2 except that we use the beat-adjusted average outcomes for oﬃcers with
Z < 0.05 and Z > 0.95 as our estimates of E(Yi0) and E(Yi1) instead of our baseline quadratic
extrapolation speciﬁcation of equation 1.
71
Figure C-7: Reoﬀending levels and treatment eﬀects by motorist characteristics
(Alternative estimates)
(a) Lenient oﬃcer mean
β  = 4.240 (0.266)
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
E(Y0)
.6
.64
.68
.72
Harshness Rate
(b) LATE
β  = 0.101 (0.063)
-.05
-.025
0
.025
LATE
.6
.64
.68
.72
Harshness Rate
Notes: Same as ﬁgure 5 except that the untreated reoﬀending rate, reported in panel (a) is estimated
by taking the average reoﬀending rate for lenient (bunching) oﬃcers; in panel (b), we show the
group-speciﬁc LATE, estimated by 2SLS, rather than the extrapolation-based ATE estimate.
72
Figure C-8: Reoﬀending levels and treatment eﬀects by motorist characteristics
(Partition-based estimates)
(a) Within oﬃcers: E(Y0)
β  = 4.268 (0.257)
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
E(Y0)
.6
.64
.68
.72
Harshness Rate
(b) Within oﬃcers: ATE
β  = 0.060 (0.070)
-.05
-.025
0
.025
ATE
.6
.64
.68
.72
Harshness Rate
(c) Across oﬃcers: E(Y 0)
β  = 4.268 (0.265)
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
E(Y0)
.6
.64
.68
.72
Harshness Rate
(d) Across oﬃcers: ATE
β  = 0.060 (0.066)
-.05
-.025
0
.025
ATE
.6
.64
.68
.72
Harshness Rate
Notes: Same as ﬁgure 5 except that the harshness rate (horizontal axis) and the reoﬀending rate
or treatment eﬀect are estimated in separate partitions of the data. In panels (a) and (b), we
construct partitions within oﬃcer and estimate the harshness rate, as well as E(Yi0) and E(Yi1) in
each partition, and show correlations across partitions. In panels (c) and (d), we instead construct
partitions across oﬃcers. Each ﬁgure shows the cross-partition correlations for one partition with
blue circles and the other with green diamonds. Each ﬁgure reports the average of the linear slope
in each partition and the boostrapped standard error.
73
Figure C-9: Marginal treatment eﬀect estimates
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05
.1
.15
Marginal Treatment Effect
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Resistance to Treatment
Linear
Quadratic
Cubic
Quartic
Quintic
Non-parametric
Notes: Marginal treatment eﬀect estimates of impact of harsh ﬁne on any reoﬀending in following
year, as described in Section 5.7.
Legend reports the order of polynomial used for the MTE
speciﬁcation. The non-parametric speciﬁcation estimates the MTE separately across bins of the
propensity score via the binscatter approach.
74
Table C-4: Treatment eﬀect estimates based on
marginal treatment eﬀect (MTE) curves
Average
Treated
Untreated
MTE Speciﬁcation
(ATE)
(ATT)
(ATU)
Diﬀ
Linear
-0.013
-0.005
-0.027
0.021
( 0.004)
( 0.004)
( 0.004)
( 0.004)
Quadratic
-0.007
0.001
-0.023
0.024
( 0.004)
( 0.005)
( 0.004)
( 0.004)
Cubic
-0.006
0.005
-0.026
0.031
( 0.004)
( 0.005)
( 0.004)
( 0.005)
Quartic
-0.007
0.004
-0.026
0.030
( 0.004)
( 0.005)
( 0.004)
( 0.005)
Quintic
-0.007
0.003
-0.026
0.029
( 0.004)
( 0.005)
( 0.004)
( 0.005)
Non-Parametric
-0.008
0.002
-0.027
0.029
( 0.004)
( 0.005)
( 0.005)
( 0.005)
Notes: Estimates of the Average Treatment Eﬀect (ATE), Treatment Eﬀect on the Treated (ATT),
and Treatment Eﬀect on the Untreated (ATU), based on the MTE curves presented in Figure
C-9. ATE is deﬁned as E(Y1 −Y0) and is estimated by summing equally across a uniform grid
of MTE estimates from resistance to treatment points u = 0.01, 0.02, ..., 0.99.
ATT is deﬁned
as E(Y1 −Y0|UD < µD(Z)) and is estimated by summing across the same grid of points and
weighting by Pr(u < ˆp), the probability of having a propensity score greater than that resistance
to treatment. ATU is deﬁned as E(Y1 −Y0|UD ≥µD(Z)) and is estimated by the same summation
but with weights Pr(u ≥ˆp).
75
D
Data Appendix
D-1
Traﬃc courts data
Traﬃc court dispositions associated with the citations from the TCATS database were also
shared by the Florida Clerk of Courts. Citations were matched to disposition information
using county codes and alphanumeric citation identiﬁers (which are unique within counties).
Some citations have no associated disposition in the TCATS database, while others have
multiple associated entries. Disposition verdicts can take on the following values:
1 = guilty; 2 = not guilty; 3 = dismissed; 4 = paid ﬁne or civil penalty; 6 = estreated
or forfeited bond; 7 = adjudication withheld (criminal); 8 = nolle prosequi; 9 = adjudged
delinquent (juvenile); A = adjudication withheld by judge; B = other; C=adjudication with-
held by clerk (school election); D = adjudication withheld by clerk (plea nolo and proof of
compliance); E = set aside or vacated by court.
In practice, the verdicts 1, 3, 4, A, and C account for the vast majority of citations. More-
over, as conﬁrmed in a phone conversation with Beth Allman at the Florida Clerk of Courts
on July 24, 2018, several of the violation codes are diﬃcult to interpret. In particular, it is
very diﬃcult in practice to infer the precise outcome of tickets with disposition codes 1, 3,
A, or those with multiple dispositions in the TCATS database.
To construct an approximate measure of court contesting, we use any disposition not
equal to 4 or C, which both imply that the individual paid their ﬁne without contest, as an
indicator that the driver contested a citation. To construct measures of eﬀective sanctions,
termed paid ﬁnes and accrued points in ﬁgure A-3, we adjust the statutory sanctions as
follows:
• Replace ﬁne = ﬁne/2 if verdict = A
• Replace ﬁne = 0 if verdict = 3
• Replace points = 0 if verdict ∈{3,A,C}
Note that our measure of paid ﬁnes is likely conservative as it ignores court fees. Drivers
contesting their tickets in court face a $75 court fee in addition to their ﬁne (the court fee can
also be waived during the court process). See Goncalves & Mello (2021) and Mello (2021)
for further discussion of the issues associated with working with the TCATS data.
D-2
Binary stringency measure
To identify oﬃcers who do not bunch, we use the Frandsen (2017) test for manipulation.
In our setting, this test implies that, under the null hypothesis of no manipulation, the
conditional probability of being found at the bunching speed is in a range around one third,
Pr(X = 9|x ∈[8, 10]) ∈[(1 −k)/(3 −k), (1 + k)/(3 + k)] where k is a restriction on the
second ﬁnite diﬀerence, ∆(2)Pr(S = 9) ≡Pr(S = 8) −2Pr(S = 9) + Pr(S = 10), such
that |∆(2)Pr(S = 9)| ≤k(Pr(S = 9) −Pr(S = 10)). Intuitively, if the distribution of
76
ticketed speeds is unmanipulated, the share of tickets at 9 MPH among those between 8 and
10 MPH should be approximately one-third, where the deviation k is due to curvature in
the distribution of speeds. We calculate k by assuming the distribution Pr(S) is Poisson
and estimating the mean parameter λ using the empirical mean of ticketed speeds. We say
that an oﬃcer is stringent (non-bunching) if we fail to reject that Pr(S = 9|S ∈[8, 10]) ≤
(1 + k)/(3 + k) at the 99 percent conﬁdence level.
To avoid the reﬂection problem, we randomly partition an oﬃcer’s stops into two halves
and compute the binary measure separately for each half of the sample. We then use the
oﬃcer’s binary measure in the other half as our binary stringency measure.
D-3
Predicted recidivism
At a few points in our analysis, we rely on a predicted reoﬀending measure based on covariates
(e.g., ﬁgure 2).
An important concern in constructing this measure is the possibility of
contamination from treatment eﬀects (e.g., if certain covariates are highly correlated with
receiving harsh ﬁnes, the predicted recidivism for these covariate groups will be too low
because of the treatment eﬀect of harsh ﬁnes on future oﬀending).
To circumvent this
concern, we construct our predicted recidivism index as follows. First, we randomly partition
each oﬃcer’s stop into halves. Each oﬃcer × partition is coded as lenient or nonlenient using
the Frandsen (2017) described above. In each partition, we regress 1[any new traﬃc oﬀense]
on driver covariates using only stops made by non-lenient (non-bunching) oﬃcers. We then
use the coeﬃcients from this regression to construct our ˆY measure in the other partition.
77
E
Technical Appendix
E-1
Within-locations approach from Feigenberg & Miller (2022)
Let j index oﬃcers, ℓindex counties, and τ index time categories, deﬁned as shift ×
1[weekend]. Let t index time, deﬁned as calendar year × month. We construct an adjusted
stringency measure for each oﬃcer × location by estimating the regression:
Dijℓτ = φjℓτ + γXijℓτ + δτ + uijℓτ
where the φ’s are ﬁxed eﬀects for each oﬃcer × location × shift category and D = 1[harsh
ﬁne]. We estimate this regression separately for each location. We then aggregate to the
oﬃcer × location level as follows:
˜Djℓ=
󰁛
τ
󰀓
ˆφjℓτ + E[ˆγXijℓτ + ˆδ|ℓ, τ]
󰀔
P(τ|ℓ)
We then repeat the exact same procedure, replacing D with Y = 1[reoﬀend] to obtain an
adjusted probability of reoﬀending for each oﬃcer × location, ˜Yjℓ.
Following Feigenberg & Miller (2022), we document the relationship between ˜Yjℓand
˜Djℓin two ways. First, we show a simple binscatter, conditional on location ﬁxed eﬀects
and weighting each oﬃcer × location by number of stops via the binsreg command. We
also estimate a linear slope corresponding to this approach by regressing ˜Yjℓon ˜Djℓand
location ﬁxed eﬀects, weighting by the number of stops. Second, we construct location-
speciﬁc quantiles of each and plot the relationship between quantiles.
In ﬁgure C-3, we show a version of our extrapolation based on this Feigenberg & Miller
(2022) approach. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁt the relationship between ˜Yjℓand ˜Djℓusing a quadratic,
conditioning on location ﬁxed eﬀects, and use the ﬁtted values at ˜D = 0 and ˜D = 1 as our
estimates of E(Yi0) and E(Yi1). As shown in ﬁgure C-3, this quadratic approximates both
the binscatter and the quantiles estimates quite well.
E-2
Calculating stopped speed for lenient tickets
We will use a version of the extrapolation approach to identify the stopped speed of drivers
who are given a lenient ticket (D = 0). Denoting stopped speed by S∗
i and ticketed speed
by Si, we know by design that Si(D = 1) = S∗
i and Si(D = 0) = 9.
We ﬁrst estimate a version of Equation 1, where stopped speed is on the left-hand side:
E(Si|Wi, Zij) = αWi+f(Zij). The extrapolation for the treated outcome gives us the average
stopped speed, ˆα ¯Wi + f(1) = E(Si1) = E(S∗
i ). Next, we know that the stopped speeds of
harshly and leniently ticketed drivers have to weight to the average, E(S∗
i ) = pE(S∗
i |D =
1) + (1 −p)E(S∗
i |D = 0) = pE(Si|D = 1) + (1 −p)E(S∗
i |D = 0). Rearranging gives us the
stopped speed of leniently ticketed drivers, E(S∗
i |D = 0) =
1
1−pE(S∗
i ) −
p
1−pE(S∗
i |D = 1).
Next, we want to understand whether the observed positive selection on levels can be
explained by oﬃcers’ preference for punishing drivers stopped at faster speeds. In other
words, if we let E(Y1|S∗
i ) be the expected oﬀending of a driver (when treated harshly)
78
stopped at speed S∗, what are E(E(Y1|S∗
i )|Di) for Di = 0 and 1 and how does the diﬀerence
compare with the true diﬀerence E(Y1i|Di) for Di = 0 and 1?
There are two steps to this estimation.
First, we need to estimate E(Y1i|S∗
i ), which
is the predicted reoﬀending rate for drivers stopped at a given speed. We can do this by
examining supremely stringent oﬃcers, so that S = S∗for practically all drivers. So we
estimate E(Y1i|S∗
i ) = E(Yi|Zi ≈1).
The second step is to identify the distribution of stopped speeds separately by treatment
status, Pr(S∗= s|Di). This distribution is directly observed for drivers treated harshly, and
we can directly calculate E(E(Y1i|S∗
i )|Di = 1) by taking the average of E(Y1i|S∗
i ) over those
drivers.
For drivers with Di = 0, we need to estimate the distribution of stopped speeds. For
each speed s, we run a version of our extrapolation where equation 1 is estimated with the
left-hand side replaced with an indicator for whether the driver is ticketed at Si = s. The
extrapolation from the most stringent oﬃcers gives us an estimate of Pr(S∗= s), the overall
probability a driver is stopped at this speed. We can then infer the frequency of this speed
for the leniently treated drivers from Pr(S∗= s|Di = 0) =
1
1−pPr(S∗= s) +
p
1−pPr(S∗=
s|Di = 1).
Our estimate for the predicted reoﬀending rate for leniently treated drivers is then
E(E(Y1i|S∗
i )|Di = 0) = 󰁓
s Pr(S∗= s|Di = 0)E(Y1i|S∗
i ).
79
