Driving licenses based on points systems: Efﬁcient road safety strategy
or latest fashion in global transport policy? A worldwide meta-analysis
Jose´ I. Castillo-Manzano n, Mercedes Castro-Nun˜o
Facultad de Ciencias Econo´micas y Empresariales, University of Seville (Spain), Avda. Ramo´n y Cajal, 1, 41018 Seville, Spain
a r t i c l e i n f o
Keywords:
Road safety
Driving license
Point-record systems
Meta-analysis approach
a b s t r a c t
One of the most popular coactive measures developed to prevent road trafﬁc accidents in recent
decades is the implementation of driving licenses based on points systems (PS) which penalize repeat
offenders with suspension or withdrawal of their licenses. This paper analyzes their rapid spread
worldwide through an in-depth review of the existing literature. A comprehensive meta-analysis of the
effects of PS on road trafﬁc accidents and the duration of these effects has been conducted. The ﬁndings
show that the strong initial positive impact (15 to 20% reductions in accidents, fatalities and injuries)
seems to wear off in under eighteen months. This limited effectiveness is related to the absence of
complementary enforcement to back up these measures. Without them, points systems could turn into
a boomerang road safety policy, and even be abandoned at a later date. The implications of the
conclusions for legislation and future research are considered.
& 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The extraordinary economic growth experienced throughout
the 20th century has raised rates of motor vehicle ownership all
around the world while, at the same time, road trafﬁc accidents
(RTA) have become one of the lethal epidemics affecting human-
kind, with 1.2 million people killed and up to 50 million more
injured every year (WHO, 2009). This is, however, a silent killer
which for years has been the object of much less media attention
than other, less everyday but more eye-catching tragedies, such
as air accidents or natural disasters.
According to the same source, unless a preventative strategy is
adopted on a global scale, RTA will become the ﬁfth leading cause
of death worldwide by 2030. In many countries, the implementa-
tion of increasingly severe road safety policies, together with the
fact that the current economic crisis has reduced trafﬁc volumes
(at least in the short term), have produced a large fall in the main
trafﬁc accident indicators during the ﬁrst decade of the 21st
century (see OECD, 2010a, 2010b). However, this improvement
has not been uniformly distributed in geographical terms, with
huge differences between high-income countries and middle-
income/low-income countries (IRF, 2009). As they have achieved
a more-or-less tested minimum degree of effectiveness (WHO,
2009), the majority of the interventions in the developed coun-
tries have been progressively imitated in developing countries.
We found basically two groups of actions: ﬁrstly, strategies that
focus on elements that are external to the road user (such as
infrastructure improvements—analyzed by A´ lvarez et al., 2007 or
safer vehicle design—studied by Christensen and Elvik, 2007);
and secondly, strategies that focus on preventing or correcting
unsafe road-user behaviors, based on the evidence that the
human element is the factor that explains the majority of
accidents (Stanton and Salmon, 2009).
This last block of actions, which has been greatly developed in
the academic literature, can in turn be classiﬁed as: preventive
measures that seek to persuade or dissuade through education and
information (such as communication campaigns and road safety
advertisements, considered by Castillo-Manzano et al., 2012 and
Lewis et al., 2008); or corrective or sanctioning measures (monetary
and non-monetary) which try to internalize the social costs of RTA
through coactive dissuasion (Castillo-Manzano et al., 2011). Apart
from the application of severe criminal penalties by Law (judicial
sentences and imprisonment) to punish the severest infringements,
other softer regulations for minor infringements based on economic
sanctions (by ﬁnes and insurance payments) and license deprivation
(by suspension or withdrawal) also stand out (Bourgeon and Picard,
2007). In road trafﬁc legislation in many countries, license depriva-
tions have evolved into a type of driving license based on a points
systems (henceforth PS) which, despite differences between coun-
tries, respond to a common philosophy that can be summarized
following Nole´n and O¨ stlin, (2008): several speciﬁc offenses com-
mitted by drivers cause the addition/loss of a certain number of
points and when the number of points reaches the maximum
allowed or all points are lost, the driver’s license is suspended.
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tranpol
Transport Policy
0967-070X/$ - see front matter & 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.tranpol.2012.02.003
n Corresponding author. Tel.: þ34 954 556727; fax: þ34 954 557629.
E-mail addresses: jignacio@us.es (J.I. Castillo-Manzano),
mercas@us.es (M. Castro-Nun˜o).
Transport Policy 21 (2012) 191–201
Despite their widespread use in practice, scientiﬁc studies on
the effectiveness of PS are not developed methodologically in the
academic literature to the same degree, and there is a certain
amount of controversy regarding the duration of their effects
(Castillo-Manzano et al., 2010). There are some studies that are
more optimistic about the impact and sustainability of the
measure’s positive effects over time, including contributions to
the success of other road safety measures (such as Zambon, et al.
2008 which attribute to it a major increase in the wearing of
seatbelts); while other authors, such as Montag (2010), claim that
its impact is only short-term and that, paradoxically, there might
even be some perverse effects, either because trafﬁc law enforce-
ment produces more risk-taking behaviors, or because there is a
decrease in the intensity of police activities due to trust in the
deterrent effect of the system on its own.1 In this line, PS can
encourage undesirable behaviors, such as hit-and-run crashes
(SWOV, 2010) and/or driving without a valid license (Knox,
et al., 2003).
In fact, following Engstr¨om et al., (2003), very little is known
about the effects of the PS on road safety, because as SWOV
(2010) states, it is very difﬁcult to isolate the impact that these
systems have from the effects of other complementary types of
enforcement being applied at the same time (i.e., an increase in
police or law enforcement, public campaigns).
The aim of this paper is to discuss some features of the points-
record mechanism, while simultaneously developing an empirical
framework to investigate in more detail if this really is an efﬁcient
global strategy for improving road safety or simply a fashion
policy which is imitated from one country to another. We use a
meta-analysis approach to investigate the effectiveness and
short- and long-term effects of this system, developed in the
framework of a ﬁxed-effects model and a random-effects model.
Rather than just a simple state-of-the-art literature review, we
select academic research from a wide search of studies developed
around the world considered as relevant on the basis of the
methodologies used and empirical ﬁndings, and we summarize a
result. This understanding is considered to be especially useful for
future expansion of the policy to developing or undeveloped
countries as it provides the keys required for its optimum design.
The paper is organized as follows: following this introduction,
Section 2 examines driving licenses based on PS as an international
strategy for reducing trafﬁc accidents. In Section 3, we explain the
design of the meta-analysis model applied, and discuss the ﬁndings.
In Section 4 the main conclusions are drawn and the implications for
road safety that derive from this research are set out.
2. Points systems to improve road safety
Driving licenses based on a points-record have their prede-
cessors in the license endorsement systems that were introduced
in the nineteen-thirties (Milulik, 2007). They have currently been
extrapolated to other areas of public politics not only related to
the transportation sector (for infractions in ﬁsheries activity in
the European Union; for illegal immigration in countries such as
Canada, Australia and New Zealand; for strict codes of discipline
at high schools in Hong Kong and India). In the present day, this
road safety strategy has been particularly recommended by
international institutions because of its potential, at least in the
initial period after its introduction, (see Global Road Safety
Partnership, 2008; SWOV, 2010). It has progressively gained
popularity and acceptance in public opinion worldwide (Nole´n
and O¨ stlin, 2008) because it is considered to be more just when
dealing more strictly with repeat offenders and fairer than a
monetary ﬁne, (the real effect of which depends on the offender’s
purchasing power, ETSC, 2008). According to Elvik and Vaa
(2004), this measure forms part of a wider road safety strategy
that includes two other enforcement measures: warning letters2
and driving license revocations. It is also an umbrella strategy, as it
covers all types of trafﬁc violations compared to other measures
included in the general legislative system which are exclusively
related to one speciﬁc offense area (speeding, alcohol).
A review of the PS in different countries reveals that, although
their structures are all similar, there are differences in their
designs and application (Nole´n and O¨ stlin, 2008). From their
analysis it can be concluded that they vary considerably in the
selection of offenses and their scoring, the ways of counting
points, the thresholds for disqualiﬁcation or duration of disqua-
liﬁcation and administration procedures. Even in the same coun-
try differences can be found between states as, in certain
countries, these are systems that are transferred to the authorities
of the various jurisdictions. This is the case of the United States,
Australia and Canada. Furthermore, the punishment applied by PS
to a trafﬁc violation may not be standardized, as in countries such
as Ireland and the United Kingdom the number of points can rise
for the same violation depending on whether the driver is found
guilty in court. The penalization is therefore adjusted for each
violation depending on its seriousness or whether it is a repetition
of the same violation (ETSC, 2008).3
There are two equivalent variations with different mechan-
isms used to compute the points that penalize offenses (see,
Nole´n and O¨ stlin, 2008): (1) Penalty PS (PPS) or point deduction:
all drivers who possess a valid license are allocated an initial
number of points from which points are deducted depending on
the offense committed. Once this initial credit runs out the license
is withdrawn. ‘‘The point is to gain no point’’ (ETSC, 2008); (2)
Demerit PS (DPS) or point accumulation: all drivers who possess a
valid license start from scratch, i.e., no points, and accumulate
points, depending on the offense committed. The license is with-
drawn after a certain number of points are accumulated.
In both cases, the deduction or apportioning of points is of a
personal nature, that is, it is directly linked to the driving license
owned by the offender so that when she/he is caught by the police
committing a trafﬁc violation the points cannot be used against
the vehicle owner via the vehicle registration number (SWOV,
2010). Similarly, in both of the versions, all drivers start in the
same situation (maximum points/ zero points), although in some
countries like Latvia or the United Kingdom, differential systems
are in place for groups of drivers with special circumstances, such
as novice drivers (with a stricter system)4 ; or professional drivers
(with a more permissive system).
According to Bourgeon and Picard (2007), in some cases such
as France or Spain, ‘‘redemptive systems’’ are applied that are not
1 According to Dionne et al., (2011), ‘‘y the police are the most important
enforcers of the different incentive schemes’’.
2 Generally-speaking, ‘‘warning letters’’ are an incentive system used to
modify negligent driving behavior in road safety (Wilde and Murdoch, 1982)
when a driver commits a certain trafﬁc offense (e.g., exceeding the speed limit, or
in photo radar enforcement). However, in some countries or US states with points
systems, like France, Michigan (U.S.), Ontario (Canada) and Spain, warning letters
are also used as ‘‘advisory written warnings’’ which are sent to drivers who are
beginning to approach the limit for license withdrawal (see, for example Castillo-
Manzano et al., 2010 and Haque, 1990).
3 This modality, which consists of graduating the penalization applied to each
violation depending on its seriousness, is not entirely sanctioned by experts such
as Elvik and Vaa (2004), who believe it is not very reliable due to its subjectivity.
4 PS can be speciﬁcally targeted at novice drivers (Netherlands and Finland) or
under Gradual Licenses (GDL) and probationary systems, which consist of trafﬁc
violations during an intermediate stage of licensing possibly delaying the novice
driver attaining a full license (e.g., a new Graduated Demerit Point System for
novice drivers in Australia, since December, 2010).
J.I. Castillo-Manzano, M. Castro-Nun˜o / Transport Policy 21 (2012) 191–201
192
only of a punitive nature but also have a rehabilitative aspect to
them. In these systems the driver who has been penalized can
have the points she/he has accumulated and removed, or recover
those that have been lost, once a certain period of time has passed
with no further offenses being committed, after attending a re-
education and road-safety awareness course self-ﬁnanced by the
offender, and even after retaking the driving test to recover
the license. On occasion, extra points are added or deducted from
the licenses of good drivers who do not commit any offense during a
certain period of time (Nole´n and O¨ stlin, 2008); this is the case in
Malaysia, where the so-called KEJARA System is applied, and Spain.
In jurisdictions such as the state of New South Wales (Australia), the
‘‘double penalty points’’ system is used to increase the level of
penalization for certain offenses (such as speeding) during holiday
periods (higher points during high-risk periods).
In some states in the US and European countries like Germany
and Ireland, PS can also produce other external effects: insurance
companies require drivers’ points-records to be reported to them
to determine whether or not to renew an insurance policy (ETSC,
2008 is analyzing the topic). This is an attempt to create a
stronger incentive for reckless drivers who do not respond to
that of insurance pricing (Dionne et al., 2011).
Irrespective of the particular features of the PS variant used,
Basili and Nicita (2005) highlight the fact that the measure also
aspires to trigger a number of favorable effects in driver behavior:
1. Deterrence or the ability to make offenders associate repeat
trafﬁc violations with more severe sanctions to the point that they
lose their licenses (Zambon et al., 2008). It could be said that the
repeated violation of trafﬁc regulations is producing a growing
marginal cost for the offender; 2. Selection or removal of the mass
of
drivers
who
repeatedly
violate
trafﬁc
regulations
with
the objective of reducing the likelihood of trafﬁc accidents
(Diamantopoulou et al., 1997); 3. Correction or incentive for
drivers to rectify their inappropriate behavior at the wheel (Poli
de Figueiredo et al., 2001); 4. Education or Prevention, as drivers
are shown which are the most serious punishable violations and
most dangerous behaviors whilst (in some countries) it is at the
same time established that courses on road safety have to be
attended (Roca and Tortosa, 2008).
In Table 1, we use the aggregation of countries in regions
proposed by WHO (2009) as an initial study criterion to distin-
guish between countries with PS (44) whilst also indicating which
variant has been implemented, PPS or DPS. The third column of
this Table also provides a sample of countries from each WHO
region for which some kind of study has been found on the effects
of the PS, irrespective of the methodology used for its measure-
ment, and together with its implementation date.
Detailed analysis of Table 1 has allowed a series of ﬁndings to
be determined:
 The areas where the development of the PS has been most
widespread can be seen to be those which include more high-
income countries (HIC), especially in the European Region. This
suggests that countries need to have the appropriate technical
means to implement the system, as well as a certain degree of
road safety culture (as described by Dodge and Kitchin, 2007).
Furthermore, the system that is most adopted in the majority
of the countries considered is the DPS method, i.e., the
original model.
 Twenty-four countries have opted for the system in the
European Region. This measure has become a generalized
standard for road safety in western countries, whereas its
application in Eastern European countries has been much
more limited and mostly conﬁned to countries that are in
the EU, such as the Czech Republic or Latvia, amongst others,
and also Turkey, which has applied to join. It seems clear that
belonging to the EU and its area of inﬂuence has been the
thread that has led countries to imitate one another. Indeed, it
could be said that after the European Commission set a target
of a 50% reduction in trafﬁc fatalities between 2000 and 2010
(European Commission, 2001), it was not so much an imitation
effect that could be spoken of among the group of measures
that European countries adopted, but rather a contagion
effect.5 There are also some EU countries where driving
licenses are not in fact based on the PS, although they do bear
many similarities. One example is Portugal, where a driving
license can be withdrawn if a court decides the offender has
been guilty of very serious offenses three times, or of serious
offenses ﬁve times, in three years, and, furthermore, drivers
must retake their driving tests to get their licenses back.
 Chronologically, after its pioneering introduction in the US over
ﬁfty years ago, the system spread to Asia and Australia and
thereafter to a European country (Germany). It has only really
expanded and been perfected in recent times as it was in the last
decade that the greatest number of changes and converts were
seen, especially in Europe. The latest regions to introduce PS have
been Africa and the Eastern Mediterranean.
 Finally, we ﬁnd cultural similarities in the PS variant adopted.
After ﬁrst being introduced in the US, the DP system has been
replicated in other Anglo–Saxon countries irrespective of the
WHO region to which they belong (Australia, New Zealand,
South Africa, Canada, UK, and Ireland or their former colonies,
such as Hong Kong). In more recent times, it has been the PPS
that has been implemented in Latin European countries (France,
Italy and Spain), and of late in these countries’ former American
colonies, such as Ecuador and Argentina, although not in colonies
that come under the cultural inﬂuence of the US, like Mexico and
Panama, which use the DPS. Researchers such as Priya and Uteng
(2009) ﬁnd correlations between cultural elements and accidents
on the basis of lifestyle and socioeconomic aspects. These studies
would uphold the idea that the international spread of this road
safety strategy is not only explained by the imitation effect that
arises between countries because of their geographical proxi-
mity, but also because of cultural issues, as it would appear that
the variant that is applied is closely linked to the peculiarities of
each country.
3. Meta-analysis of effectiveness of point systems
mechanisms
One of the objectives of this study is to synthesize a series of
results on the size and duration of PS effects worldwide from
previous studies that have used various methodologies. The meta-
analysis approach has advantages over a literature review for this
because of its statistical nature and its inference process (Glass et al.,
1981). This approach has been broadly developed over the last 20
years, basically in experimental sciences and environmental eco-
nomics, although a variety of precedents can also be found of its
being applied to a range of road safety strategies in recent years (see
for example Erke, 2009, for red-light cameras; Høye, 2010, for front
airbags; or Phillips, et al., 2011, for advertising campaigns). As far as
PS are concerned, there is a precedent in Elvik et al. (2009), who
synthesized a number of speciﬁc studies related to DPS-linked
elements and license suspensions (warning letters, special driving
tests and improvement courses).
5 As has been seen from the measures that have been progressively applied by
the various countries, according to OECD, (IRTAD) (2010).
J.I. Castillo-Manzano, M. Castro-Nun˜o / Transport Policy 21 (2012) 191–201
193
3.1. Study design: data coding and variables
An initial search was conducted in the academic literature to
identify the most recent research on the topic of the effects of PS
around the world, with the constraint of the publication form
(articles
in
peer
reviewed
scientiﬁc
journals
or
institutional
reports).6 Using general search terms in order that no study should
be excluded a priori, these studies have been found in the following
sources: the reputed Transportation Research Information Services
(TRIS) database (U.S. Department of Transportation), PubMed
(online database of the U.S. National Library of Medicine), the ISI
Web of Knowledge, Scopus and Science direct (Elseviers online
databases), reports from research institutes such as SWOV (The
Netherlands) and TRL (UK) and Internet searches by Google Scholar.
In this way almost ﬁfty studies with these characteristics were
located although they are all greatly heterogeneous, especially with
regard to their methodologies. Some are eminently theoretical (such
as Basili and Nicita, 2005 and Bourgeon and Picard, 2007), whilst
others are based on a comparison of before-and-after statistics (Poli
de Figuereido et al., 2001).
Only a sample of suitable studies was selected, using typical
inclusion criteria in meta-analysis (see Elvik, 1999), i.e., those
which: 1. Include an estimation of PS effectiveness and/or duration
using statistical or econometric methodology that seeks to separate
out the effects of PS from other variables that might have had an
effect during the period analyzed (both meta-analyses and studies
that only evaluate elements such as warning letters and re-
education courses were rejected since, as was indicated in
Section 2, these are not applied equally in all countries); 2. Report
the standard deviation, conﬁdence interval, sample size or similar
statistical information about the accuracy and robustness of the
results. The initial data sample was reﬁned by the application of
these quality indications and a total of 26 studies from around the
world were ﬁnally included in the meta-analysis, many of them
with multiple relevant results which could be used to expand the
ﬁnal sample. This suitable method of data collection was char-
acterized by a coding procedure, as seen in Tables 2–5.
Following the methodology described in Section 3.2, below,
two scenarios were envisaged for the meta-analysis:
SCENARIO (I) Estimation of summary effects of PS: To minimize
the likely heterogeneity among the 26 suitable studies, these
were classiﬁed into 3 subgroups depending on the type of
variables that were considered for evaluating the effects of the
PS. As there are studies with multiple results, the sample size will
be the total number of results computed7:
 I VTRA: Variables related directly to RTA, in terms of reduc-
tions in the number of accidents, casualties, fatalities or
injured. These variables were found in 13 studies with 24
results (m¼24).
Table 1
Countries with points systems in the who regions.
Source: Authors. based on WHO (2009), ETSC (2008) and road trafﬁc legislation in each country.
WHO
region
No. of countries/
income level
Countries with a points system driving license (DPS or PPS) such asy
Selected countries/year points
system implemented
1
41 (0 HIC, 11 MIC,
30 LIC)
South Africa (DPS)
South Africa (in Pretoria, 2006)
2
32 (6 HIC, 26 MIC,
0 LIC)
Argentina (PPS), Bermuda (DPS), Brazil (DPS), Canada (DPS), Ecuador (PPS), Jamaica (DPS), Mexico
(DPS), Panama (DPS), Peru (DPS), United States of America (DPS)
– USA (state by state, i.e.
Connecticut, 1957)
– Canada (state by State, i.e.
Quebec, 1978)
– Brazil (1998)
3
10 (0 HIC, 6 MIC,
4 LIC)
–
–
4
20 (5 HIC, 12 MIC,
3 LIC)
Qatar (DPS), The United Arab Emirates (DPS)
The United Arab Emirates (2008)
5
49 (25 HIC, 21
MIC, 3 LIC)
Austria (DPS), Bulgaria (DPS), Cyprus (DPS), The Czech Republic (DPS), Denmark (DPS), France (PPS),
Germany (DPS), Greece (PPS), Hungary (DPS), Iceland (DPS), Ireland (DPS), Israel (DPS), Italy (PPS),
Latvia (DPS), Lithuania (DPS), Luxembourg (DPS), Malta (DPS), Norway (DPS), Poland (DPS), Romania
(DPS), Slovenia (DPS), Spain (PPS), Turkey (DPS), United Kingdom (DPS)
– Germany (1974)
– United Kingdom (1988)
– France (1992)
– Finland (1996)a
– Ireland (2002)
– The Netherlands (2002)a
– Italy (2003)
– Austria (2005)
– Spain (2006)
– The Czech Republic (2006)
6
26 (6 HIC, 15 MIC,
5 LIC)
Australia (DPS), China (DPS), Japan (DPS), Malaysia (DPS), New Zealand (DPS), Republic of Korea
(DPS), Singapore (DPS),
– New Zealand (1967)
– Japan (1968)
– Australia (state by state, i.e.
Victoria, 1970)
– China (jurisdiction by
jurisdiction, i.e. Hong
Kong, 1984)
Notes: DPS: Demerit point system, PPS: Penalty point system.
HIC: High-income countries; MIC: Middle-income countries; LIC: Low-income countries.
1. African Region; 2. Region of the Americas; 3. South-East Asia Region; 4. Eastern-Mediterranean Region; 5. European Region; 6. Western Paciﬁc Region.
a Only Points Systems for novice drivers on probation.
6 In order to reduce any possible bias, sources and bibliography were chosen
blindly by the authors of the study.
7 Following Elvik and Vaa, (2004) we assume the independence hypothesis
between multiple results.
J.I. Castillo-Manzano, M. Castro-Nun˜o / Transport Policy 21 (2012) 191–201
194
 I VDB: Variables related to driver behavior, in terms of
reductions in risky or dangerous conduct, driving less unsafely
(a smaller percentage of drivers not wearing seatbelts, for
example) or a reduction in law violations (speed limits, drink-
driving). These variables were found in 8 studies with 18
results (m¼18).
 I VHCD: Variables related to health care data, in terms of
reductions in RTA related A&E admissions, surgery or hospi-
talizations. These variables were found in 5 studies with
8 results (m¼8).
SCENARIO (II) Estimation of the duration of the PS effect: The
variable considered in this case (LENGTH OF EFFECTS) is the
duration of PS effects, in number of months, estimated for each of
the studies. As can be seen in Tables 2–5, not all the suitable
studies analyze this issue. To be precise, we shall work with the
sample of 20 studies that do (m¼20).
3.2. Methodological aspects.
The estimation method used was the ‘‘log-odds model’’ found
in Elvik and Vaa (2004). In this method, the estimations of the
suitable studies are combined to obtain a summary-measure
using mean weighting according to the statistical weight (the
inverse of the precision of the study). According to the following
formula, the mean weighted effect for ‘‘m’’ estimations ðYÞ will be:
Y ¼ exp
Pm
i ¼ 1 wiyi
Pm
i ¼ 1 wi


ð1Þ
When: yi¼log (i-th estimation obtained by each study).
wi¼the statistical weight of the i-th estimation obtained as
wi ¼ ð1=viÞ, when vi is the variance of each i-th estimation,
whereby Pm
i ¼ 1 wi ¼ 1:
The possible heterogeneity of the studies can be taken into
account using the random-effects model (REM), or not included if
the ﬁxed-effects model (FEM) is used. The FEM assumes that there
is one single effect on the population and does not take into
account the variability of the results among the different studies.
The size of the study and its own variance (intra-study variability)
are the only determinants of its weight in the meta-analysis. The
Dersimonian and Laird Q statistic (1986) is calculated to verify the
validity of this hypothesis, distributed in accordance with a Chi-
Square with m-1 degrees of freedom (m¼no. of combined
estimations):
Q ¼
X
m
i ¼ 1
wiy2
i  ðPm
i ¼ 1 wiyiÞ2
Pm
i ¼ 1 wi
ð2Þ
If the null hypothesis is rejected (H0: non heterogeneity) it is
recommended that REM be used as this does take into account
Table 2
Selected studies in the Americas region: coded data.
Source: Authors.
Country/
income
level
Researcher/place
Proxy
of
effects
Methodology
Results
TIME series
studied/–time–
span of effects
Brazil (MIC)
Liberatti et al. (2001)/
(city of Londrina)
VTRA
Before/ After analysis using
Chi-squared and Fisher’s tests.
A reduction of 20% of car and 9.1% of motorcycle accident
victims. An increase of 39% in use of safety belts and of 112% in
use of helmet.
(1997–1998)/6
months
VBD
Maffei de Andrade
et al. (2008)/(city of
Londrina)
VTRA
Linear regression.
A 28.4% greater reduction in mortality levels than under other
previous measures.
(2000–2005)/12
months
Canada (HIC)
Chen et al. (1995)/
(British Columbia)
VTRA
Logistic regression.
The results showed a consistent increase in post period accidents
per driver with increasing pre period number of crashes.
(1985–1990)/24
months
Dionne et al. (2011)/
(Quebec)
VBD
Proportional Hazards Model.
The frequency of trafﬁc violations was reduced by 15% and the
risk of a RTA after a trafﬁc offense was 20% lower.
(1985–1996)/12
months
Redelmeier et al.
(2003)/(Ontario)
VBD
Case-crossover study
The risk of a fatal crash in the month after a conviction was
about 35% lower.
(1988–1999)/2
months
United States
of America
(HIC)
Gebers and Peck
(2003)/(California)
VBD
Both multiple linear regression
analysis and canonical
correlation.
An improvement of 14.9% in classiﬁcation for predicting and
identifying accident-involved drivers.
(1992)/No
quantiﬁed period
of effects
HIC: High-income country; MIC: Middle-income country; LIC: Low-income country.
VTRA: Variables related directly to RTA, in terms of reductions in the number of accidents, casualties, fatalities or injured; VBD: Variables related to driver behavior, in
terms of reductions in risky or dangerous conduct, driving less unsafely or a reduction in law violations; VHCD: Variables related to health care data, in terms of reductions
in RTA-related A&E admissions, surgery or hospitalizations.
Table 3
Selected studies in the Eastern-Mediterranean region: coded data.
Source: Authors.
Country/
income level
Researcher/
place
Proxy
of
effects
Methodology
Results
Time series studied/time-span of
effects
The United
Arab
Emirates
(HIC)
Mehmood
(2010)/(Al
Ain)
VBD
Independent
sample t-test
using SPSS.
The DPS has statistically no signiﬁcant impact on the speeding
behavior of drivers because of the lack of effective trafﬁc monitoring
system.
(3 months before/3 months after
introduction)/No quantiﬁed period
of effects
HIC: High-income countries; MIC: Middle-income countries; LIC: Low-income countries.
VTRA: Variables related directly to RTA, in terms of reductions in the number of accidents, casualties, fatalities or injured; VBD: Variables related to driver behavior, in
terms of reductions in risky or dangerous conduct, driving less unsafely or a reduction in law violations; VHCD: Variables related to health care data, in terms of reductions
in RTA-related A&E admissions, surgery or hospitalizations.
J.I. Castillo-Manzano, M. Castro-Nun˜o / Transport Policy 21 (2012) 191–201
195
possible heterogeneity by considering that the effects of expo-
sure/intervention on the population are varied and that the
effects analyzed by the included studies are only a random
sample of all possible effects. Weighting studies with REM
considers not only their own variance (intra-study variability),
but also the variance that might exist between studies (inter-
study variability):
sy ¼ ½Q2ðm1Þ
c
ð3Þ
where: Q¼Dersimonian and Laird statistic. m¼no. of estimations
considered.
c¼estimator
calculated
as
c ¼ Pm
i ¼ 1 wi½Pm
i ¼ 1
w2
i = Pm
i ¼ 1 wiwhereby the variance and the statistical weight of
each i-th estimation would be, respectively
vn
i ¼ sy þvi
and
wn
i ¼ 1=vn
i
In both cases (FEM and REM), the upper/lower limits of the
conﬁdence intervals (CI) (in our case, at 95%), are calculated by
the formula (4):
CI ¼ exp Y 7
1:96
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
P statistical weights
p
 
!
ð4Þ
Any possible publication biases can be identiﬁed analytically
using the Begg (Begg and Mazumbar, 1994) and Egger (Egger et al.,
1997) tests, which test the null hypothesis for the lack of said bias.
Table 4
Selected studies in the European region: coded data.
Source: Authors.
Country/income
level
Researcher/
place
Proxy
of
effects
Methodology
Results
Time series studied/–
time–span of effects
Czech Republic, The
(HIC)
Montag
(2010)/
VTRA
Standard differences-in-
differences methodology.
Fatalities were about 30% lower during ﬁrst three
months after the law was introduced.
(2004–2008)/3 months
Ireland (HIC)
Butler et al.
(2006)
VHCD
Statistical analysis using a
two-factor ANOVA and
Chi-squared test.
In the ﬁrst 6 months, there was a signiﬁcant reduction
(48.4%) in RTA-related spinal admissions. In the ﬁrst
year, there was a 25% reduction in deaths.
(1998–2004)/6 months
Healy et al.
(2004)
VHCD
Statistical analysis with a
Chi-squared test.
The number of RTA- related admissions fell to 17
compared to an average of 33 in the preceding 4 years.
(1998–2003)/6 months
Hussain et al.
(2006)
VHCD
Retrospective cohort study.
Sixty-one percent reduction in operations on injuries
caused by collisions.
(2001–2003)/12 months
Saeed et al.
(2010)
VHCD
Statistical analysis was
performed using the Chi-
squared test.
After the offense of not wearing a seatbelt was added
to the DPS in 2003, there was a 60% decline in the
proportion of admissions for RTA-related eye-injuries.
(2001–2007)/No
quantiﬁed period of
effects
Italy (HIC)
Benedettini
and Nicita
(2009)
VTRA
3SLS regression and
Poisson Regressions.
A strong ‘announcement effect’ two years before the
implementation of the PPS. A decrease of 72.87% in
speeding tickets, of 17.80% in total RTA and 26.42% in
fatal RTA.
(2001–2008)/24 months
before introduction
VBD
De Paola
et al. (2010)
VTRA
Regression discontinuity
design.
A reduction of about 10% in RTA and of about 25% and
15% in trafﬁc fatalities and injuries, respectively.
(2001–2005)/No
quantiﬁed period of
effects
Farchi et al.
(2007)/(The
Lazio Region)
VHCD
Poisson models.
Twelve percent fewer RTA A&E visits; hospitalizations
decreased by 16% and RTA-related deaths decreased by
4%.
(2001–2004)/6 months
Zambon et al.
(2007)/
(Veneto
Region)
VBD
Time-series analysis with
ARIMA model.
An increase in seatbelt use of 51.8% among drivers, of
42.3% among front passengers and of 120.7% among
rear passengers. The number of RTA fatalities and
injuries declined, with a reduction of 18% and 19%
respectively.
(1999–2004)/18 months
VTRA
Zambon et al.
(2008)/
(Veneto
Region)
VBD
Poisson models.
An increase in seatbelt use of 83% for drivers and 76%
for passengers.
(2003–2005)/15 months
Spain (HIC)
Aparicio-
Izquierdo
et al. (2011)
VTRA
Time-series analysis with
ARIMA models.
A mean reduction in fatalities of between 11.27% and
13.9%.
(1995–2009)/Effects
maintained throughout
the study period
Castillo-
Manzano
et al. (2010)
VTRA
Time-series analysis with
unobserved components
model.
An average reduction of 12.6% in the number of deaths
in RTA.
(1980–2007)/24 months
(for deaths) and 12 (for
injured)
Novoa et al.
(2010)
VTRA
Quasi–Poisson regression
models.
The overall number of people injured showed a
reduction of 5% and 4% among men and women,
respectively, and an 11% and 12% reduction for
seriously injured people.
(2000–2007)/18 months
Pulido et al.
(2010)
VTRA
Time-series analysis
through ARIMA models.
A reduction of 14.5% in overall fatalities.
(2000–2007)/18 months
United Kingdom
(HIC)
Simpson
et al. (2002)
VBD
Questionnaire survey and
empirical analysis using
Chi-squared test.
The results of a new PPS for novice drivers led to a
decrease in the percentage of drivers (5.8 to 4.5)
offending in their 2nd year of post-test driving.
(1992-94; 1997–1998)/
24 months
HIC: High-income countries; MIC: Middle-income countries; LIC: Low-income countries.
VTRA: Variables related directly to RTA, in terms of reductions in the number of accidents, casualties, fatalities or injured; VBD: Variables related to driver behavior, in
terms of reductions in risky or dangerous conduct, driving less unsafely or a reduction in law violations; VHCD: Variables related to health care data, in terms of reductions
in RTA-related A&E admissions, surgery or hospitalizations.
J.I. Castillo-Manzano, M. Castro-Nun˜o / Transport Policy 21 (2012) 191–201
196
This analysis must be complemented with an interpretation of so-
called funnel plots diagrams to avoid any false positives or false
negatives due to the loss of power of detection that these tests can
be subject to in small samples (Sterne et al., 2000).
A funnel plot is a tool used to compare the estimation in a
graph using some precision measure, such as a standard error
function, for example. If the graph is symmetrical, in an inverted
‘‘V’’ shape, it is interpreted as proof of there probably being no
publication bias. If the graph is asymmetric, it is interpreted as
publication bias probably existing.
3.3. Results
Table 6 shows (in columns) the main results obtained for the
4 meta-analyses formulated in all the scenarios (in rows), using a
total sample of m¼70 individual estimations for 26 suitable studies.
In order to analyze the heterogeneity of the sample the values are
taken for the Dersimonian and Laird Q (1986) statistics and the
Takkouche et al. (1999) RI coefﬁcient (¼proportion of the total
variance due to between-study variance). The pooled odds ratios
obtained (OR) for each scenario with FEM and REM, respectively
(with the conﬁdence interval limits) are set alongside the Begg and
Egger test p-values enabling the presence of publication biases that
alter the ﬁnal result to be identiﬁed.
All the Q statistics are signiﬁcant. This would, in principle, allow
the homogeneity null hypothesis to be rejected at 99% in all cases.
Following Takkouche et al. (1999), given that in the three analyses
done for scenario I, RI is clearly greater than 0.75, we understand
that the Dersimonian and Laird Q statistic is sufﬁciently powerful to
detect heterogeneity, overcoming the limitations that this statistic
presents for small samples (see Fleiss, 1993). Therefore, for scenario
I, the OR estimated by REM is more reliable (which is why columns
7 and 8 of Table 6 with the REM results have been highlighted). This
presence of random elements means it can be deduced that the
results of the intervention analyzed are in reality varied, and that the
estimations offered by the various studies included in our meta-
analysis are only a random sample of possible effects. The differ-
ences from one country to another would be based on the countries’
own peculiar features, such as the advertising campaigns or the
other more forceful enforcement measures (ﬁxed speed cameras,
lower blood alcohol limits, ﬁnes and heavier legal sanctions, poli-
cing) that accompany the application of PS.
In any case, in quantitative terms no signiﬁcant differences can
be appreciated between the results obtained with FEM and REM,
which enables us to conclude that our estimations are robust, as is
Table 5
Selected studies in the Western-Paciﬁc region: coded data.
Source: Authors.
Country/
income
level
Researcher/place
Proxies
of
effects
methodology
Results
Time series
studied/–time–
span of effects
China
(MIC)
Wong et al.
(2008)/(Hong
Kong)
VBD
Multinomial logit model.
An increase in penalty points produced a positive deterrence effect in
combating red light violations (coefﬁcient¼0.0959).
(2005–2006)/12
months
Sze et al. (2011)/
(Hong Kong)
VTRA
Binomial regression model.
The number of red light offense RTA and casualties dropped by 23% and
29%, respectively.
(2005–2007)/12
months
Australia
(HIC)
Diamantopoulou
et al. (1997)/
(Victoria)
VTRA
Logistic regression model.
Adding a driver’s prior offenses (whether as demerit point levels or
categories of offense) into this model produced the best predictive ability
in identifying drivers with future RTA.
(1991–1994)/No
quantiﬁed period
of effects
VBD
Haque (1990)/
(Victoria)
VBD
Poisson model using
maximum likelihood
estimation methods.
The estimated mean inter-offense time interval between 2nd and 3rd
offenses for drivers was signiﬁcantly longer than the interval between 1st
and 2nd offenses.
(1982–1985)/No
quantiﬁed period
of effects
HIC: High-income countries; MIC: Middle-income countries; LIC: Low-income countries.
VTRA: Variables related directly to RTA, in terms of reductions in the number of accidents, casualties, fatalities or injured; VBD: Variables related to driver behavior, in
terms of reductions in risky or dangerous conduct, driving less unsafely or a reduction in law violations; VHCD: Variables related to health care data, in terms of reductions
in RTA-related A&E admissions, surgery or hospitalizations.
Table 6
Meta-analysis outcomes.
Source: Authors.
Scenario
Sample size
Q statistic
(p-value)
RI
a
ORb (FEM)/
CI limits 95%
Resultd (FEM)/
CI limits 95%
ORc (REM)/
CI limits 95%
Resultd (REM)/
CI limits 95%
Begg’s test
(p-value)
Egger’s test
(p-value)
I (VTRA)
m¼24
0.0000nnn
0.9944
2.9588
(2.9444; 2.9734)
19.2748
(18.993; 19.5583)
2.7570
(2.5516; 2.9789)
15.7525
(12.8276; 19.6662)
0.1574
0.3945
I (VBD)
m¼18
0.0000nnn
0.9998
3.4592
(3.4536; 3.4647)
31.7915
(31.6140; 31.9669)
3.3119
(2.9009; 3.7811)
27.4372
(18.1905; 43.8643)
0.2889
0.8765
I (VHCD)
m¼8
0.0000nnn
0.9992
4.0938
(4.0909; 4.0967)
59.9673
(44.1282; 61.6825)
3.9510
(3.7871; 4.1220)
51.9873
(59.7937; 60.1415)
0.7105
0.1318
II (LENGTH OF EFFECTS)
m¼20
0.0002nnn
0.6912
2.8088
(2.7305; 2.8893)
16.5900
(15.3406; 17.9807)
2.7663
(2.5602; 2.9840)
15.8997
(12.9384; 19.7667)
0.1119
0.2286
Notes: Deﬁnition of variables for Scenarios: VTRA: Variables related directly to RTA, in terms of reductions in the number of accidents, casualties, fatalities or injured; VBD:
Variables related to driver behavior, in terms of reductions in risky or dangerous conduct, driving less unsafely or a reduction in law violations; VHCD: Variables related to
health care data, in terms of reductions in RTA-related A&E admissions, surgery or hospitalizations; Length of effects: number of months.Signiﬁcance at nnn1%, nn5%, n10%,
respectively.
a RI indicates the proportion of the total variance due to between-study variance.
b Odd Ratios for ﬁxed-effects model and random-effects model expressed in logarithm.
c Odd ratios for ﬁxed-effects model and random-effects model expressed in logarithm.
d Results (exponential OR) expressed in % for all variables of Scenarios I and number of months for Scenario II.
J.I. Castillo-Manzano, M. Castro-Nun˜o / Transport Policy 21 (2012) 191–201
197
also shown by the sensitivity analyses done.8 In both models, the
variables that experience a more positive effect with the coming
into effect of the PS are the VHCD (with reductions of over 50%
both in the number of hospitalizations and in A&E admissions),
followed by the VBD (with a reduction in the number of reckless
behaviors of around 30% on average). Meanwhile, the weakest
effect seems to be on the VTRA (with reductions in accidents,
fatalities and injuries of between 15 and 20%), i.e., the variables
most directly related to road trafﬁc accidents.
Considering scenario II, a number of doubts could be raised
about which of the two methods for estimating the Length of
Effects is more appropriate as, despite the Q statistic rejecting the
homogeneity null hypothesis at 99%, the RI coefﬁcient is slightly
under
0.75,
indicating
that
its
detection
is
less
powerful
(Takkouche et al., 1999). Notwithstanding, this problem is irrele-
vant given how similar the estimations by both FEM and REM are,
with a difference of only 21 day between them (16.6 months
compared to 15.9 months effects duration). In any event, the
duration of the effects of PS is on average less than one and a
half years.
When this result is tested against Tables 2–5, it can be seen
that of the 26 assessments analyzed in 11 different countries, 20
determine the length of the effects of a PS, and of these 9 give
durations of over 12 months. Even in these cases no effect lasted a
period of over 2 years, and there was simply an interim effect
compared to other road safety measures with more structural
effects (see e.g., Aparicio Izquierdo et al., 2011 for policing and
Castillo-Manzano et al., 2010 for mandatory seatbelt use in
Spain). Another interesting aspect is that 7 of these 9 evaluations
with effects of over 12 months are for the same two European
countries, Italy and Spain, which started out with road accident
rates that were higher than the mean for the Eurozone (WHO,
2009). The system’s implementation in these countries was also
accompanied by widespread dissemination of advertising cam-
paigns in the institutional media and in all private news media,
which shaped a favorable perception as far as public opinion is
concerned (Novoa et al., 2010 for Spain; Benedettini and Nicita,
2009 for Italy). Speciﬁcally in the case of Italy, Benedettini and
Nicita (2009) found there was an effect even before the PPS law
came into force, with the media interest bringing about a positive
‘‘announcement effect’’, i.e., the effects of PPS introduction were
anticipated even before it had been effectively adopted as law.
The remaining 11 studies coincide in 12 months being a quite
likely duration for the effects of the measure and that the effects
would not remain stable throughout this period of a year, but
would gradually decrease. Speciﬁcally, after a major initial shock
during the months that immediately followed PS coming into
force, the effects quickly wane with time. There is clear evidence
that this major shock was noted even in countries where the
effects immediately ﬁzzled out. In Canada, for example (see
Redelmeier et al., 2003), although it was estimated that the
effects only lasted 2 months, there was a 35% fall in the risk of
a fatal crash and in the Czech Republic (see Montag, 2010),
despite the effects being limited to only 3 months, fatalities were
about 30% lower.
The p-values obtained in the Egger and Begg Tests in Table 6
show that, in principle, our estimations could be stable from the
point-of-view of publication biases, as the lack of bias null
hypothesis cannot be rejected in all the scenarios. However, as
these detection methods are known to not always be very
powerful (e.g., Sterne et al., 2000), it is recommended that the
tests are complemented with an interpretation of the funnel plots
diagrams (Palma-Pe´rez and Delgado-Rodrı´guez, 2006) which are
included for all the analysis scenarios in Figs. 1–4.
The parameter standard error (SE) is represented on the x-axis,
the parameter for each study (odds ratio, OR) on the y-axis and
each estimation by a point. The result is a funnel which narrows to
the left as higher precision studies (smaller SE, equivalent to a
larger sample size) are on the left-hand side of the ﬁgure and
there is less variability between them. A symmetrical ﬁgure rising
from a horizontal axis that passes through the parameter’s
weighted value would indicate the absence of this error.
As can be seen in Figs. 1–4, more or less asymmetrical ﬁgures
are obtained for all scenarios which contradict the tests done in
Table 6 and indicate the existence of publication biases. However,
caution should be used when interpreting this. In fact, according
to Thornton and Lee (2000), symmetry can be subjectively deﬁned
by the researcher, especially when there are small numbers of
points. Heterogeneity between the estimations can also interfere
when assessing of publication bias.
Notwithstanding, following Høye and Elvik (2010) publication
biases are very frequently found in meta-analysis to evaluate the
effects of a road safety measure. These authors state that there are
certain prejudices about omitting the publication of statistically
nonsigniﬁcant studies or those with adverse results, as it is not
reasonable for public opinion to expect a road safety measure that
has no effect. Another possible source of these publication biases
could be the strict ﬁlter applied to select the study sample for the
Standard Error (SE)
Effect Estimation
Fig. 1. VTRA scenario. Note: Effect estimation in log scale.
Source: Authors.
Standard Error (SE)
Effect Estimation
Fig. 2. VBD scenario. Note: Effect estimation in log scale.
Source: Authors.
8 The results of the sensitivity analysis are available from the authors upon
request.
J.I. Castillo-Manzano, M. Castro-Nun˜o / Transport Policy 21 (2012) 191–201
198
meta-analysis (see Section 3.1). Certain studies from several
countries have been deliberately omitted either because the
methodologies that they applied were not very rigorous (before
and after statistical comparisons), or because they were ‘suspi-
cious’ for having been carried out by governmental organizations
and not being widely disseminated academically.
4. Conclusions and implications for road safety
Since their pioneering implementation in the US in the mid
20th century, driving licenses based on points systems have
rapidly expanded to countries with high and medium income
levels on all continents, especially in the European region. As
Nole´n and O¨ stlin, (2008) and ETSC (2008) state, their popularity
and social acceptance as one of the fairest corrective and punish-
ment measures for internalizing the social costs of road trafﬁc
accidents seem to be the key to their wide-ranging development
over the last decade. Despite recommendations from prestigious
international organizations, very little is known in the academic
literature about the effects of points systems on road safety,
because it is very difﬁcult to isolate their impact from the effects
of other concurrent complementary types of enforcement applied
(SWOV, 2010) (policing, laws or advertising campaigns). In this
regard, studies such as Castillo-Manzano et al. (2010) point to the
most controversial aspect of points systems linked to their overall
effects in the short- and long-term.
Our study analyzes whether points systems really are effective
for bringing down the trafﬁc accident rate or whether this is just a
fashionable policy that countries in close geographical proximity
or with similar cultural patterns imitate. The effects of points
systems and the duration of the effects have been estimated by
applying a meta-analysis approach to a sample of 70 estimations
taken from 26 scientiﬁc assessments from 11 countries. Although
it might result in publication bias, a strict sample selection
criterion was opted for and a number of suspicious and possibly
less scientiﬁcally rigorous studies were omitted.
The results of the sensitivity analyses enable it to be robustly
stated that all the variables beneﬁt from the implementation of a
points system. To be precise, reductions of over 50% in numbers of
road trafﬁc accident-related emergency admissions, surgery and
hospitalizations are recorded. Reductions of around 30% in the
number of law violations and risky and dangerous driver beha-
viors are also estimated. However, the most signiﬁcant effect,
(given that the outcomes are directly linked to road trafﬁc
accidents), is the reduction between 15 and 20% seen in the
number of accidents, fatalities and injuries. By contrast, the high
expectations that points systems generate among public opinion
and the road safety authorities with regard to duration in time
have not been subsequently supported by long-term results as, in
general terms, the effects wear off in less than 18 months. Only
7 of these studies state that the effects have durations of over 12
months, but also indicate that they last under 2 years. Most of
these seven studies, incidentally, refer to Spain and Italy, coun-
tries, precisely, where the system has been accompanied by major
advertising campaigns, as shown by Novoa et al., (2010) and
Benedettini and Nicita, (2009). It seems that this measure has
only a major initial shock on a wide range of road safety variables
and indicators, although the effect quickly declines over time
when there are no other complementary enforcement measures.
In short, as Twisk and Stacey (2007) state, many of the counter-
measures that affect a licensing process are not effective without
enforcement that increases the feeling that you could be caught,
and complemented with media coverage that reduces the incen-
tive for offenders to persist in their unsafe behaviors.
Given that the beneﬁts seem to be running out in terms of road
safety, it is necessary to compute the estimated cost of imple-
mentation. To date, little has been provided regarding quantiﬁca-
tion other than, according to Elvik and Vaa, 2004, that these costs,
a priori, logically seem to be theoretically lower than for other
road trafﬁc accident prevention methods, such as road improve-
ments. For Elvik. et al. (2009), the lack of a full estimation of these
costs would explain why to date a more-than-required Cost-
Beneﬁt Analysis has not been conducted for this measure.
For all these reasons, a future line of research that begs to be
suggested is a realistic estimation of the costs of this measure.
This estimation should take into account both the design of the
information campaigns that support them and changes in the
country’s policing, legal and administrative systems that result
from their application. With respect to the information cam-
paigns, these have to be extended to cover the whole of the
population and also need to be intensive in order to deal with all
aspects of the system, from the various violations that are
envisaged, to the license withdrawal process and its later recov-
ery. With regard to the policing and legal-administrative systems
being adapted, to prevent injustices there should be full coopera-
tion between all the authorities responsible for road safety with
the aim of ensuring that the monitoring, detection and recording
of all sanctions is standardized wherever they take place.
If the measure is implemented in a way that is lacking in this
respect it could lead either to the measure being futile, as would
seem to have been the case in The Arab Emirates (see Mehmood,
2010),
or
that
systematic
injustices
are
committed
among
Standard Error (SE)
Effect Estimation
Fig. 4. VHCD scenario. Note: Effect estimation in log scale.
Source: Authors.
Standard Error (SE)
Effect Estimation
Fig. 3. VHCD scenario. Note: Effect estimation in log scale.
Source: Authors.
J.I. Castillo-Manzano, M. Castro-Nun˜o / Transport Policy 21 (2012) 191–201
199
offenders. Citizens who live in small localities with an insufﬁcient
number of police ofﬁcers or administrations with a lack of
resources for adapting their systems for punishing offenses could
be favored in this respect; by way of example, improper parking
in a big city would lead to a ﬁne and demerit/penalty points,
whereas in a small town this same sanction would only involve a
ﬁne. The legal system also has to be adapted as the number of
court
cases
related
to
trafﬁc
violations
would
foreseeably
increase, with a consequent rise in the number of appeals. And
the administrative system would also have to be adjusted to
regularize the license recovery process and even to set up new
driving courses for these drivers.
From the analysis of the points systems in force in the various
countries, the issue arises as to whether the lack of harmonization
among more or less bordering countries might generate feelings
of injustice among residents of other nationalities. The favorable
treatment meted out to foreign drivers in some countries where
the system is in place (they are totally exempt) could also cut
down the system’s effectiveness and generate public lack of trust.
It is these discrepancies that mean that it is impossible to talk of a
global angle to points systems. Fortunately, to mitigate this,
countries like Japan, France and Hungary have recently tightened
their systems for the application of the points systems to be
extended to foreign drivers, while in other countries reciprocal
agreements on trafﬁc violation issues are being implemented
with common records of violators being kept (such as in the case
of the UK and Ireland). Other initiatives also stand out, such as:
Singapore, where the demerit points system has been extended to
include foreign driving license holders since 1999 so that foreign
drivers who accumulate 24 demerit points or more within a
period of 24 months will be served Prohibition Orders banning
them from driving; or Luxembourg, which provides non-resident
drivers driving in the country with a ‘‘virtual driving license’’ based
on a demerit points system.
There is also another series of costs associated with the points
systems which are much more difﬁcult to quantify, such as black
markets springing up where points can be bought and sold, i.e.,
run by third persons who are generally not habitual drivers or
simply have not driven for years. SWOV (2010) and Corbett et al.
(2008), explain that they personally incriminate themselves for
violations in which it is difﬁcult to identify the driver (improper
parking, breaking the speed limit) in exchange for some ﬁnancial
compensation.
As such, it is a complicated matter to compute the costs of this
strategy, although they should not be underestimated; the effects
have been spectacular in the ﬁrst months after introduction, but
have decreased progressively and, generally-speaking, rapidly. In
short, it seems difﬁcult that the rapid geographical expansion of
PS could be justiﬁed only on the basis of this temporary con-
tribution to road safety. It could be attributed to an imitation
effect, and as such be a clear example of the accelerating
transnationalization of policy norms and practices (see Peck and
Theodore, 2010) set in motion to achieve fast, striking results.
However, if no further complementary measures are adopted to
accompany the system, trafﬁc accident rates soon rise (as proven
by Farchi et al., 2007 for Italy and Hussain et al., 2006 for Ireland),
and it will turn into a transport policy boomerang. This could
contribute to explaining the continual reformulation and revi-
sions made every so often to PS that have been in effect for a
decade or more in countries like Canada and the United Kingdom.
To conclude, the implementation of a points system is far from
being a global panacea that should be adopted lightly. Judging by
the assessments that we have analyzed, it could be especially
appealing for countries with high trafﬁc accident rates as long as
they have sufﬁcient economic resources. This circumstance could
end up limiting its usefulness for medium- or low-income
countries and this on top of the fact that it is precisely these
countries that might be more interested in altering their licensing
systems since the ones that they currently have in place present
more defects on average (see Hathaway, 1993). Therefore, its
introduction in medium- or low-income countries by necessity
demands a prior reﬂection process which takes into account said
costs and the availability of resources to bear them. Otherwise, it
could end up creating more disadvantages than advantages
which, in turn, could lead to the measure being abandoned, as
has recently been the case in Costa Rica.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to express their gratitude to Yoram
Shiftan and the anonymous reviewers for their very helpful
comments.
References
A´ lvarez, P., Lo´ pez-Rodrı´guez, F., Canito, J.L., Moral, F.J., Camacho, A., 2007.
Development of a measure model for optimal planning of maintenance and
improvement of roads. Computers & Industrial Engineering 52, 327–335.
Aparicio Izquierdo, F., Arenas Ramı´rez, B., Mira McWilliams, J.M., Pa´ez Ayuso, J.,
2011. The endurance of the effects of the penalty point system in Spain three
years after. Main inﬂuencing factors. Accident Analysis and Prevention 43,
911–922.
Basili, M., Nicita, A. (2005). Deterrence and compliance in a demerit point system.
Quaderni 458. Dipartimento di Economia Politica.Universita degli Studi di
Siena. Italy.
Begg, C.B., Mazumbar, M., 1994. Operating characteristics of a rank correlation test
for publication bias. Biometrics 50, 1088–1101.
Benedettini, S., Nicita, A. (2009). Deterrence, incapacitation and enforcement
design. Evidence from trafﬁc enforcement in Italy. Quaderni del Dipartamento
di Economia Politica, 564, August. Universita´ Degli Studi Di Siena. Italy.
Bourgeon, J.M., Picard, P., 2007. Point-record driving license and road safety: an
economic approach. Journal of Public Economics 91, 235–258.
Butler, J.S., Burke, J.P., Healy, D.G., Stephens, M.M., McManus, F., McCormack, D.,
2006. Trends in RTA related spinal injuries: the post penalty points era. Irish
Journal of Medical Science 175, 20–23.
Castillo-Manzano, J.I., Castro-Nun˜o, M., Pedregal-Tercero, D.J., 2010. An econo-
metric analysis of the effects of the penalty points system driver’s license in
Spain. Accident Analysis and Prevention 42, 987–1420.
Castillo-Manzano, J.I., Castro-Nun˜o, M., Pedregal-Tercero, D.J., 2011. Can fear of
going to jail reduce the number of road fatalities? The Spanish experience.
Journal of Safety Research 42, 223–228.
Castillo-Manzano, J.I., Castro-Nun˜o, M., Pedregal-Tercero, D.J., 2012. How many
lives can bloody and shocking road safety advertising save? The case of Spain.
Transportation Research F: Trafﬁc Psychology and Behaviour 15 (2), 174–187.
Chen, W., Cooper, P., Pinili, M., 1995. Driver accident risk in relation to the Penalty
Point System in British Columbia. Journal of Safety Research 26, 9–18.
Corbett, C., Delmonte, E., Quimby, A., Grayson, G., 2008. Does the Threat Of
Disqualiﬁcation Deter Drivers from Speeding? Road Safety Research Report 96.
Department for Transport DfT, London. United Kingdom.
Christensen, P., Elvik, R., 2007. Effects on accidents of periodic motor vehicle
inspection in Norway. Accident Analysis and Prevention 39, 47–52.
De Paola, M., Scoppa, V., Falcone, M., 2010. The Deterrent Effects of Penalty Point
System in Driving Licenses: A Regression Discontinuity Approach. Working
paper No. 4, Italy. Dipartimento di Economia e Statistica. Universita´ Della
Calabria.
Dersimonian, R., Laird, N., 1986. Meta-analysis in clinical trials. Control Clinical
Trials 7, 177–188.
Diamantopoulou, K., Cameron, M., Dyte, D., Harrison, W., 1997. The Relationship
Between Demerit Points Accrual and Crash Involvement. Accident Research
Centre. Report 116. Monash University, Australia.
Dionne, G., Pinquet, J., Maurice, M., Vanasse, Ch., 2011. Incentive mechanisms for
safe driving: a comparative analysis with dynamic data. The review of
Economics and Statistics 93, 218–227.
Dodge, M., Kitchin, R., 2007. The automatic management of drivers and driving
spaces. Geoforum 38, 264–275.
Egger, M., Smith, G.D., Schneider, M., Zinder, Ch., 1997. Bias in meta-analysis
detected by a simple, graphical test. British Medical Journal 31, 629–634.
Elvik, R., 1999. Assessing the Validity of Evaluation Research by Means of Meta-
Analysis. Report 430. Institute of Transport Economics, Oslo. Norway.
Elvik, R., Vaa, T., 2004. The Handbook of Road Safety Measures, ﬁrst ed. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Elvik, R., Høye, A., Vaa, T., Sørensen, M., 2009. The Handbook of Road Safety
Measures, second ed. Emerald Group Publishing Limited, United Kingdom.
J.I. Castillo-Manzano, M. Castro-Nun˜o / Transport Policy 21 (2012) 191–201
200
Engstr¨om, I., Gregersen, N.P., Hernetkoski, K., Keskinen, E., 2003. Young Novice
Drivers, Driver Education and Training. Literature Review. Swedish National
Road and Transport Research Institute.
Erke, A., 2009. Red light for red-light cameras?: A meta-analysis of the effects of
red-light cameras on crashes. Accident Analysis and Prevention 41, 897–905.
ETSC (European Transport Safety Council) (2008). Combatting speed through
Penalty Point Systems. Speed Fact Sheet, 2, June. Brussels, Belgium.
European Commission, 2001. White Paper—European Transport Policy for 2010:
Time to Decide. Ofﬁce for Ofﬁcial Publications of the European Communities,
Luxembourg.
Farchi, S., Chini, F., Rossi, P.G., Camilloni, L., Borgia, P., Guasticchi, G., 2007.
Evaluation of the health effects of the new driving penalty point system in
the Lazio Region, Italy, 2001–4. Injury Prevention 13, 60–64.
Fleiss, J.L., 1993. The statistical basis of meta-analysis. Statistical Methods in
Medical Research 2, 121–149.
Gebers, M.A., Peck, R.C., 2003. Using trafﬁc conviction correlates to identify high
accident-risk drivers. Accident Analysis and Prevention 35, 903–912.
Glass, G.V., McGaw, B., Smith, M.L., 1981. Meta-Analysis in Social Research. Sage,
Beverly Hills.
Global Road Safety Partnership. (2008). Speed management, a road safety manual
for decision-makers and practitioners. /http://www.who.int/roadsafety/pro
jects/manuals/speed_manualS. (accessed July 2011).
Haque, M., 1990. Evaluation of the demerit point system in deterring trafﬁc
offenses. Evaluation Review: A journal of Applied Science Research 14, 22–41.
Hathaway, J.T., 1993. ‘Go-slow’: the political economy of urban transport in
Nigeria with an emphasis on Ado-Ekiti. Geoforum 24, 165–182.
Healy, D.G., Connolly, P., Stephens, M.M., O’Byrne, J.M., McManus, F., McCormack,
D., 2004. Speed and spinal injuries. Injury 35, 908–912.
Høye, A., 2010. Are airbags a dangerous safety measure? A meta-analysis of the
effects of frontal airbags on driver fatalities. Accident Analysis and Prevention
42, 2030–2040.
Høye, A., Elvik, R., 2010. Publication bias in road safety evaluation. How can it be
detected and how common is it? Journal of the Transportation Research Board
2147, 1–8.
Hussain, O., Nayyar, M., Brady, F., Beirne, J., Stassen, L., 2006. Speeding and
maxillofacial injuries: Impact of the introduction of penalty points for
speeding offenses. British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery 44, 15–19.
IRF (International Road Federation) (2009). World Road Statistics. /http://www.
irfnet.orgS. Switzerland.
Knox, D., Turner, B., Silcock, D., 2003. Research into Unlicensed Driving. Final
report. Road Safety Research Report 48. Department for Transport DfT, London.
United Kingdom.
Lewis, I, Watson, B., White, K.M., 2008. An examination of message-relevant affect
in road safety messages: Should road safety advertisements aim to make us
feel good or bad? Transportation Research Part F 11, 403–417.
Liberatti, C.L.B., Maffei de Andrade, S., Soares, D.A., 2001. The new Brazilian trafﬁc
code and some characteristics of victims in southern Brazil. Injury Prevention
7, 190–193.
Maffei de Andrade, S., Soares, D.A., Matsuo, T., Liberatti, C.L.B., Iwakura, M.L.H.,
2008. Road injury-related mortality in a medium-sized Brazilian city after
some preventive interventions. Trafﬁc Injury Prevention 9, 450–455.
Mehmood, A., 2010. Evaluating impact of demerit points system on speeding
behavior of drivers. European Transport Research Review 2, 25–30.
Milulik, J., 2007. Penalty points systems: efﬁcient technique of enforcement and
prevention. Road safety on four continents. 14th International Conference,
Bangkok, Thailand 14–16 November 2007. Conference Proceedings. Swedish
National Road and Transport Research Institute, VTI. Sweden.
Montag, J., 2010. Radical change in trafﬁc law: effects on road safety in the Czech
Republic. Available at Social Science Research Network: /http://ssrn.com/
abstract=1595882S. Accessed September 2010.
Nole´n, S., O¨ stlin, H., 2008. Penalty Points Systems—a Pre-Study. Road Trafﬁc
Inspectorate of Sweden, Publication no. 2008-12, Sweden.
Novoa, A.M., Pe´rez, K., Santamarin˜a-Rubio, E., Marı´-Dell’Olmo, M., Ferrando, J.,
Peiro´, R., Tobı´as, A., Zori, P., Borrell, C., 2010. Impact of the penalty points
system on road trafﬁc injuries in Spain: a time-series study. American Journal
of Public Health 100, 2220–2227.
OECD, International Road Trafﬁc and Accidents Database (IRTAD), 2010a. Annual
Report.
OECD, International Road Trafﬁc and Accidents Database (IRTAD). A record decade
for road safety, International Transport Forum. Paris, 15 September 2010. (/
http://internationaltransportforum.org/Press/PDFs/2010-09-15IRTAD.pdfS.
Accessed October 2010b).
Palma-Pe´rez, S., Delgado-Rodrı´guez, M., 2006. Practical considerations on detec-
tion of publication bias. Gaceta Sanitaria 20, 10–16.
Peck, J., Theodore, N., 2010. Mobilizing policy: models, methods and mutations.
Geoforum 41, 169–174.
Phillips, R.O., Ulleberg, P., Vaa, T., 2011. Meta-analysis of the effect of road safety
campaigns on accidents. Accident Analysis and Prevention 43, 1204–1218.
Poli de Figueiredo, L.F., Rasslan, S., Bruscagin, V., Cruz, R., Rocha e Silva, M., 2001.
Increases in ﬁnes and driver license withdrawal have effectively reduced
immediate deaths from trauma on Brazilian roads: ﬁrst-year report on the
new trafﬁc code. Injury 32, 91–94.
Priya, T., Uteng, A., 2009. Dynamics of transport and social exclusion: effects of
expensive driver’s license. Transport Policy 16, 130–139.
Pulido, J., Lardelli, P., de la Fuente, L., Flores, V.M., Vallejo, F., Regidor, E., 2010.
Impact of the demerit point system on road trafﬁc accident mortality in Spain.
Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 64, 274–276.
Redelmeier, D.A., Tibshiriani, R.J., Evans, L., 2003. Trafﬁc-law enforcement and risk
of death from motor-vehicle crashes: case-crossover study. The Lancet 361,
2177–2182.
Roca, J., Tortosa, F., 2008. The effectiveness of the penalty point system on road
safety. Securitas Vialis 1, 27–32.
Saeed, A., Khan, I., Dunne, O., Stack, J., Beatty, S., 2010. Ocular injury requiring
hospitalisation in the South East of Ireland: 2001–2007. Injury, International
Journal of the Care of the Injured 41, 86–91.
Simpson, H., Chinn, L., Stone, J., Elliott, M., Knowles, J., 2002. Monitoring and
evaluation of safety measures for new drivers. Transport Research Laboratory
(TRL) report. Crowthorne, Berkshire, UK.
Stanton, N.E., Salmon, P.M., 2009. Human error taxonomies applied to driving: a
generic driver error and its implications for intelligent transport systems.
Safety Science 47, 227–237.
Sterne, J.A.C, Gavaghan, D., Egger, M., 2000. Publication and related bias in meta-
analysis: power of statistical tests and prevalence in the literature. Journal of
Clinical Epidemiology 53, 1119–1129.
SWOV, 2010. Demerit Points Systems. Fact sheet. Institute for Road Safety
Research. Leidschendam, The Netherlands.
Sze, N.N., Wong, S.C., Pei, X., Choi, P.W., Lo, Y.K., 2011. Is a combined enforcement
and penalty strategy effective in combating red light violations? An aggregate
model of violation behavior in Hong Kong. Accident Analysis and Prevention
43, 265–271.
Takkouche, B., Cadarso-Sua´rez, C., Spiegelman, D., 1999. Evaluation of old and new
tests of heterogeneity in epidemiologic meta-analysis. American Journal of
Epidemiology 150, 206–215.
Thornton, A., Lee, P., 2000. Publication bias in meta-analysis: its causes and
consequences. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 53, 207–216.
Twisk, D.A.M, Stacey, C., 2007. Trends in young driver risk and countermeasures in
European countries. Journal of Safety Research 38, 245–257.
WHO (World Health Organization), 2009. Global status report on road safety: time
for action. Geneva. /www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/road_safety_s
tatus/2009S. Accessed September 2010.
Wilde, G.J.S., Murdoch, P.A., 1982. Incentive systems for accident-free and viola-
tion-free driving in the general population. Ergonomics 25, 879–890.
Wong, S.C., Wong, C.W., Sze, N.N., 2008. Attitudes of public light bus drivers to
penalties to combat red light violations in Hong Kong. Transport Policy 15,
43–54.
Zambon, F., Fedeli, U., Visentin, C., Marchesan, M., Avossa, F., Brocco, S., Spolaore,
P., 2007. Evidence-based policy on road safety: the effect of the demerit points
system on seat belt use and health outcomes. Journal of Epidemiology and
Community Health 61, 877–881.
Zambon, F., Fedeli, U., Milan, G., Brocco, S., Marchesan, M., Cinquetti, S., Spolaore,
P., 2008. Sustainability of the effects of the demerit points system on seat belt
use: a region-wide before-and-after observational study in Italy. Accident
Analysis and Prevention 40, 231–237.
J.I. Castillo-Manzano, M. Castro-Nun˜o / Transport Policy 21 (2012) 191–201
201
