Implementing and Evaluating ASSISTments Online 
Math Homework Support At large Scale over Two Years: 
Findings and Lessons Learned 
Mingyu Feng1[0000-0001-9635-1611], Neil Heffernan2[0000-0002-3280-288X], Kelly Collins1,    
Cristina Heffernan3, and Robert F. Murphy4 
1 WestEd, San Francisco, California 94107, USA 
2 Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, Massachusetts 01609, USA 
3 The ASSISTments Foundation, Auburn, Massachusetts 01501, USA 
4 LFC Research, California 94043, USA 
 
mfeng@wested.org, nth@wpi.edu, kelly.collins@wested.org, 
cristina.heffernan@assistmetns.org, bfmurph@icloud.com 
Abstract. Math performance continues to be an important focus for improve-
ment. The most recent National Report Card in the U.S. suggested student math 
scores declined in the past two years possibly due to COVID-19 pandemic and 
related school closures. We report on the implementation of a math homework 
program that leverages AI-based one-to-one technology, in 32 schools for two 
years as a part of a randomized controlled trial in diverse settings of the state of 
North Carolina in the US. The program, called “ASSISTments,” provides feed-
back to students as they solve homework problems and automatically prepares 
reports for teachers about student performance on daily assignments. The paper 
describes the sample, the study design, the implementation of the intervention, 
including the recruitment effort, the training and support provided to teachers, 
and the approaches taken to assess teacher’s progress and improve implementa-
tion fidelity. Analysis of data collected during the study suggest that (a) treatment 
teachers changed their homework review practices as they used ASSISTments, 
and (b) the usage of ASSISTments was positively correlated with student learn-
ing outcome.  
Keywords: ASSISTments, math learning, effective teaching, AI-based pro-
gram, school implementation 
1 
Introduction 
Math performance continues to be an important focus for improvement in the United 
States. Due to the promise of technology as a tool for improving mathematics education 
and closing the achievement gap, the use of educational technology in K-12 education 
has expanded dramatically in recent years, accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Presented at the The 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education, July 3-7, 2023
                                                           in Tokyo, Japan.

2 
The AIED and intelligent tutoring systems researchers and developers have built nu-
merous technology-based learning platforms and programs, and many have been shown 
to be effective in a lab setting, or with a small number of closely monitored classrooms. 
Yet few of these products have been implemented at large scale in authentic school 
settings over an extended period. The challenges of wide adoption and effective imple-
mentation in schools come from several aspects, such as understanding school settings 
and meeting school priorities, availability of technology infrastructure to guarantee suf-
ficient student/teacher access to equipment, integration of the program into established 
classroom practices, as well as training and continuous support for users to ensure sus-
tained use with fidelity. In this paper we report on a large-scale efficacy randomized 
controlled trial (RCT) in diverse settings of the state of North Carolina in the U.S. In 
particular, we focus on the implementation of the ASSISTments platform and discuss 
how we have addressed each challenge to ensure faithful implementation.  
The ASSISTments platform [1] is a technology-based, formative assessment plat-
form for improving teacher practices and student math learning outcomes. As students 
work through problems and enter their answers into ASSISTments, the system provides 
immediate feedback on the correctness of answers and offers additional assistance in 
the form of hints or scaffolds. Students’ performance on ASSISTments problems serves 
as an assessment of proficiency, enabling teachers to adjust classroom instruction and 
pacing to match the knowledge base of the class. ASSISTments was identified as ef-
fective at improving student learning and changing teacher’s homework review prac-
tices during an efficacy study in Maine ([2,3], effect size g=.22, p<.01). We recently 
conducted a large scale RCT to replicate the Maine study and see whether the found 
effects replicate in a heterogeneous population that more closely matches national de-
mographics. The replication study to test the impact of the ASSISTments platform on 
students’ math learning was guided by the following research questions:  
• Student learning: Do students in schools that use ASSISTments for homework learn 
more than students in schools that do homework without ASSISTments? 
• Impacts on classroom instruction: Does using ASSISTments lead to adjustment in 
teachers’ homework practices, and, if so, how they have done this? 
• Relationship between usage and student learning outcome: What are the effects of 
implementation fidelity and dosage on learning? 
2 
Background  
2.1 
The ASSISTments Program 
Over the past two years, ASSISTments use in schools increased significantly, going 
from supporting 800 teachers to supporting 20,000 teachers and their 500,000 students. 
A rapid review that synthesizes existing evidence in online programs that promoted 
learning recommended ASSISTments as one of the few digital learning programs for 
use in response to the COVID pandemic [4]. A review of 29 studies that met rigorous 
standards of randomization [5] indicated that ASSISTments was one of only “Two in-
terventions in the United States [that] stand out as being particularly promising.”  

3 
The platform uses technology to give teachers new capabilities for assigning and 
reviewing homework and to give students additional support for learning as they do 
homework. Content in ASSISTments consists of mathematics problems with answers 
and hint messages. These mathematics problems are bundled into problem sets which 
teachers can use ASSISTments to assign to students in class or as homework. Students 
first do their assigned problems on paper and then enter their answers into ASSIST-
ments to receive immediate feedback about the correctness of their answers, and/or 
hints on how to improve their answers or help separate multi-step problems into 
parts. One type of problem set is mastery-oriented “Skill Builders”. Each skill builder 
provides opportunities for students to practice solving problems that focus on a targeted 
skill, until they reach a teacher-defined “mastery” threshold of proficiency (e.g., a 
streak of three correct answers on similar math problems). ASSISTments also imple-
ments the research-based instructional strategy of spaced practice [6] by automatically 
re-assessing students on skills and concepts that were “mastered” earlier at regular in-
tervals, and providing further opportunities for students to hone those skills. 
ASSISTments provides teachers with 
real-time, easily accessible reports that sum-
marize student work for a particular assign-
ment in a grid format (Fig. 1), which teach-
ers can use to target their homework review 
in class and tailor instruction to their stu-
dents’ needs. These reports inform teachers 
about the average percent correct on each 
question, skills covered in the assignment, 
common wrong answers, and each student’s 
answer to every question. The color-coded 
cells provide information on each student’s performance on each problem, in a format 
that enables teachers to focus on the problems that were difficult for many students. 
Teachers use information about individual students to form instructional groups and 
address common difficulties.  
2.2 
Theoretical Framework 
The design and development of ASSISTments aligns to theory- and empirically-based 
instructional practices of formative assessment [7] and skill development [8], and is 
built upon the following theoretical foundations and empirical research.   
Immediate Feedback to Learners. Feedback has been identified as a powerful way 
to increase student learning [9]. An extensive set of studies (e.g., [10, 11, 12]) has found 
significant learning gains in response to feedback within computer-based instruction. 
A common form of feedback is correctness feedback, in which feedback informs the 
learner if their response is correct or incorrect, with no other information. Studies have 
shown positive results of correctness feedback [13, 14].  
Formative Assessment. Formative assessment provides feedback to both teachers 
and students by informing teachers of student learning and progress and students of 
their own performance in relation to learning goals. Several decades of research have 
 
Fig. 1. An item report for teachers. 

4 
shown formative assessment, also known as assessment for learning, to be an effective 
way of improving both teaching and student learning [15, 16, 17, 18, 19].  
Education technology can facilitate formative assessment and have a significant ef-
fect on improving math learning [20, 21]. Teachers benefit from the information and 
analytics on student learning and performance that these tools can provide, which help 
them modify instruction and better adapt to student learning needs [21, 22]).  
Mastery learning and spaced practice.  In mastery learning, students only advance 
to a new learning objective when they demonstrate proficiency with the current one. 
Mastery learning programs lead to higher student achievement than more traditional 
forms of teaching [23,24]. An Institute of Education Sciences (IES) Practice Guide [6] 
recommends spacing practice over time. Research has demonstrated that retention in-
creases when learners are repeatedly exposed to content (see [25, 26, 27]).  
Homework to boost learning. Homework is often required in middle schools and 
expected by students and parents, and a meaningful amount of instructional time is 
allocated to homework [28, 29]. Yet it is also somewhat controversial and perceived as 
needing improvement (e.g. [30, 31]). Homework provides a key opportunity for indi-
vidual practice, which is undeniably important to mathematics learning. To “make 
homework work,” teachers are recommended to streamline assignments and be inten-
tional with each assignment, taking into account factors such as whether students un-
derstand the purpose of the assignment and the feedback the teacher will provide [32].  
2.3 
Research Design 
Sample and Settings. The study1 took place in North Carolina (NC), a state more de-
mographically representative of the U.S. than Maine. Sixty-three schools from 41 dif-
ferent districts enrolled in the study. Demographic characteristics of the schools are 
shown in Fig. 2, comparing to the Maine study and the population in the U.S.. These 
schools served several different grade levels (6-8, 8-12, K-8) and were distributed 
across rural, town, suburban, and city communities (33 rural, 11 town, 8 suburban, and 
11 city). Of the 63 schools, 18 were charter schools, 45 were public schools, and 48 
received Title 1 funding. 102 7th grade math teachers and their classrooms enrolled in 
the study.  
 
Fig. 1. Demographics of Participating Schools 
 
1  The study has been pre-registered on Registry of Efficacy and Effectiveness Studies (REES) 
https://sreereg.icpsr.umich.edu/framework/pdf/index.php?id=2064. The study has been ap-
proved by the Institutional Review Board at Worcester Polytechnic Institute and WestEd. Par-
ticipating teachers all signed consent forms. Parents received a notification letter and opt-out 
form for their children.  

5 
Study Design. Schools within each district were paired based on their demographic 
characteristics and student prior performance on state math and English language arts 
(ELA) tests and then randomly assigned to a treatment or business-as-usual control 
condition. Overall, 32 schools and 60 teachers were assigned to the treatment condition 
and 31 schools and 52 teachers to the control condition. All seventh-grade math teach-
ers in a school had the same assignment of condition. 
The study was carried out during the 2018-19 and 2019-20 school years. During the 
study, ASSISTments was conceptualized as consisting of both teacher professional de-
velopment (PD) and the use of the platform by teachers and students as illustrated by 
the theory of change in Fig 3.  
 
 
Fig 3. ASSISTments Theory of Change 
The program was implemented by all Grade 7 teachers in the treatment schools over 
two consecutive years—the first year was a ramp-up year, where teachers in the treat-
ment condition learned and practiced using the tool with their students. The second year 
of implementation was the measurement year when treatment teachers continued to use 
ASSISTments with a new cohort of 7th grade students whose math learning outcome 
was measured in spring 2020. Treatment teachers received 2 days of PD during summer 
2018 and 2019, and additional coaching and technical assistance distributed across the 
school year via webinars, video conferencing, and 2-3 times in-person visits each 
school year. Teachers had the full discretion to either select pre-built content from AS-
SISTments that aligns with the learning standards they teach in class, or request to have 
their own homework problems built in the system for them to assign.  
Teachers in the control condition did not have access to ASSISTments or to the PD 
and coaching till summer 2020 (“delayed treatment”). They continued with their typical 
homework practices (“business-as-usual”) including the possible use of other online 
homework platforms or supplemental programs in class. We used an end-of-year sur-
vey and daily instructional logs to collect information on their homework assignment 
and reviewing practices as well the online platforms control teachers have used to as-
sign homework. Teachers reported using a variety of technology programs, including 
Kahoot, Schoolnet, iXL, Khan Academy, iReady, Quizlet, Desmos, MobyMax, Prod-
igy, BrainPoP, SuccessMaker, Freckle, etc., as well as online resources provided by 
curriculum providers. 
Influence of COVID. The onset of COVID-19 forced the closure of study schools 
March 2020 and the move to remote instruction until the end of the school year across 

6 
all participating districts. This forced unplanned changes to the implementation of the 
study. It shortened the expected duration and lessened intensity of the use of ASSIST-
ments by 2-3 months, which potentially could have affected the study’s measured effect 
on student learning. ASSISTments use records indicated a significant drop in use coin-
ciding with school closures. By the middle of April, 43% teachers in the treatment 
group resumed using ASSISTments to support their remote instruction, although at a 
reduced level compared to prior to school closures. Fig. 4 summarizes usage before and 
after the outbreak of the pandemic during the 2019-20 school year. Additionally, the 
state End-Of-Grade test (EOG), which was planned to serve as the primary outcome 
measure of student learning, was canceled for spring 2020. We had to request teachers 
to administer a supplemental online assessment as a replacement. 
 
Fig. 4. Summary of ASSISTments Usage during 2019-20 
3 
Implementation of ASSISTments at Scale 
The adoption and successful implementation of a technology-based program in authen-
tic school settings for an extended period is influenced by numerous factors. Below we 
discuss in detail how we addressed some of them during multiple stages of the study.  
3.1 
Recruitment 
Recruitment participants for large school-based studies, particularly RCTs, poses a sig-
nificant challenge. Schools are often engaged in various initiatives at any given time. 
Given the dynamic nature of district and school-level initiatives, gaining buy-in for a 
research-based program like ASSISTments can be difficult, even though it is a free 
platform that has demonstrated rigorous empirical impact. Some schools may view AS-
SISTments as less sophisticated than similar commercial tools and may already be us-
ing paid tools for similar purposes. Moreover, schools may be reluctant to adopt a new 
free tool due to associated costs and the learning curve involved. 
To address these challenges, researchers treated recruitment as an advertising cam-
paign and identified factors that supported or inhibited participation, responding ac-
cordingly. Uncertainty associated with randomization hindered schools’ willingness to 
participate, which was mitigated by offering control schools free access to ASSIST-
ments in a non-study grade level plus delayed treatment for control schools. North Car-
olina schools varied in their technology adoption and teacher preferences for learning 
management systems (LMSs). To overcome these concerns, the recruitment was con-
fined to districts that have implemented 1:1 access to computers. ASSISTments was 
developed as a versatile tool that can be used on any device without internet access and 

7 
easily integrated with most common LMSs in North Carolina. The team examined dis-
trict priorities based on public information and targeted recruitment efforts toward 
schools with a history of low math performance that prioritize the use of data to per-
sonalize student learning—a fit for the ASSISTments program.  
3.2 
Understanding school context 
Early during the study, we conducted interviews with school principals to identify fac-
tors that could affect the fidelity of implementation. Participants were asked about: their 
concerns regarding students’ performance in math; the school’s major priorities or areas 
of focus; the technology available to students at school, specifically for math, and at 
home; and their homework and data-use policy. Principals in the treatment group were 
also asked whether they foresaw of any obstacles to the use of ASSISTments or any 
additional supports that would help teachers use ASSISTments. The interviews helped 
us discover what could facilitate the use of ASSISTments (e.g., school initiative focus-
ing on improvement and student identity; common planning time within grade level; 
established homework policy) and what could inhibit its use in the schools (e.g., limited 
access to technology). We then customized the communication and support for each 
school to ensure the program align with the school’ context for easier implementation. 
3.3 
Training and continuous support   
Research suggested when both PD and formative assessment technology are provided, 
teachers can learn more about their students and adapt instruction, resulting improve-
ments in student outcomes. In this study, a former high school teacher and remediation 
program organizer coached treatment teachers on integrating ASSISTments into in-
struction and provided ongoing coaching and technical support throughout the school 
year via webinars, video conferencing, and in-person visits. During the PD, treatment 
teachers learned techniques such as encouraging students to rework problems they ini-
tially got wrong, focusing on incorrect homework problems, reviewing solution pro-
cesses for difficult problems, and addressing common misconceptions. The PD training 
helped teachers to utilize the technology's reports to make informed decisions, such as 
identifying which problems or students to prioritize. As a result, teachers were able to 
personalize instruction for individual students, groups, or the entire class; for example, 
they could assign additional practice to individual students (e.g., by assigning skill 
builders) or adding other problems or hints to existing problem sets. 
3.4 
Specifying a use model and expectation 
To aid teachers in integrating ASSISTments into their existing instructional practices, 
the intervention was framed into a 4-step loop that aligns with common homework rou-
tines, as illustrated in Fig. 5. This approach helped teachers avoid the burden of figuring 
out how to utilize the program in their instruction and ensured consistency in program 
implementation. Per the use model, treatment teachers were expected to assign approx-
imately 20-23 minutes of homework via the platform twice per week using a combina-
tion of textbook-based problems and pre-built content. Teachers were also expected to 
open reports for at least 50% of assignments. Opening the reports is a precursor to 

8 
adapting instruction. Teachers were given autonomy in determining the amount and 
type of homework to assign. The clearly specified expectation served as an objective 
for sufficient dosage of implementation, which is crucial for the effectiveness of any 
intervention.  
3.5 
Monitoring dosage and evaluating quality of implementation 
Corresponding to the four-step loop, the ASSISTments team created a rubric (Fig. 6) 
that was used to assess teacher’s progress in implementing the four steps during the 
school year. During the in-person school visits, the local coach evaluated each teacher’s 
status according to the rubric and recorded their evaluation in a coach log, which was 
used to track a teacher’s progress over time and gauge whether additional support 
needed to be provided to the teacher. The color-coded log (one row per teacher, Fig. 7) 
made it easy for the coach to identify teachers who have improved from visit 1 to visit 
3 (e.g., rows 4 or 5), or teachers who regressed over time (e.g., rows 1 or 6).  
      
 
Fig. 6. 4-Step Rubric for Evaluating Progress 
 
Fig 7. A Part of Coach Logs of School Visits during the 2019-20 School Year 
4 
Data Collection 
Student Learning. We obtained student demographic, enrollment and prior grade state 
test performance data from the state-wide database hosted by the North Carolina Edu-
cation Research Data Center (NCERDC)2. Student demographic data accessed include 
gender, race/ethnicity, free and reduced-price lunch status, and individualized educa-
tion program status. Students’ 6th grade EOG math scores served as a measure of prior 
 
2 Our agreement with NCERDC doesn’t permit sharing of obtained data with any third parties. 
Other data collected during the study has been deposited to the Open ICPSR data repository 
(https://www.openicpsr.org/openicpsr/project/183645/version/V1/view). 
 
 

9 
achievement. As a replacement for the state test, the study team requested teachers to 
administer the online Grade 8 Mathematics Readiness Test (MRT) early May during 
remote learning time. The test is aligned with the Common Core State Standards. An 
analysis found a strong alignment between MRT and the NC Course of Study Standard 
Topics. Analysis of the response data suggested a correlation of 0.68 between students’ 
MRT scores and their 6th grade EOG test scores from spring 2019, and the reliability 
of the test (KR20 for dichotomous items) was 0.94. 
Teacher Homework Practice Measure. An interview was conducted with a sample 
of treatment and control teachers to their homework practices and the kinds of instruc-
tional supports the school and district provide to teachers. A quantitative measure of 
teacher homework review practice-Targeted Homework Review-was created from 
teacher self-reports on weekly instructional logs. All teachers were asked to complete 
daily 10-minute online logs during 5 consecutive instructional days across 3 collection 
windows across the school year for a total 15 instructional days. On average, the log 
completion rate was 81 percent for control teachers and 96 percent for treatment teach-
ers. Teachers were asked if they reviewed assignments with the whole class and the 
ways they select which problems to review with the class (e.g., I reviewed all the prob-
lems, I reviewed a sample of problems that I think my students might have difficulty on, 
I asked my students what problems they wanted to go over).  
Student and Teacher Use of ASSISTments. The primary source of ASSISTments 
use data was the electronic use records collected by the ASSISTments system.  All stu-
dent and teacher actions on the platform are time-stamped. Student system use data 
includes their login time, duration of each session, the number of problems attempted, 
and answered correctly and incorrectly, whether an assignment was completed on time, 
and student-to-system interactions during problem-solving, such as requesting hint or 
commenting on a question. Teacher use data includes the dates each assignment was 
created, the kind of problems assigned, the type of assignment (e.g., whole class, or in-
dividualized), assignment due date, and whether the teacher opened a report. These data 
allowed us to assess the extent to which students used ASSISTments to complete their 
math homework and the extent to which teachers assigned problems and monitored 
students' homework performance according to the implementation model.  
5 
Analysis and results 
Student Learning Outcomes. For the impact analysis, we used a two-level hierar-
chical linear model (i.e., students nested within schools), controlling for school-level 
and student-level characteristics and students’ prior achievement on their sixth-grade 
math state tests. The model didn’t detect a significant difference between treatment and 
control students in their performance on the MRT test (p > 0.05).  
Teacher Practice Outcomes. Analysis of teacher interview transcripts showed, all 
teachers in the treatment group noticed some changes in their instructional practices 
since they began using ASSISTments. Some of the changes identified by the teachers 
included: more thoughtful selection of problems; more one-on-one teaching; and being 

10 
more efficient and more targeted in their instruction. Most of them have found the AS-
SISTments reports to be valuable and have shared them with students by projecting the 
anonymized reports on a screen in front of the class.  
An HLM model with teacher and school levels was posited to look at the effect of 
ASSISTments on teacher practices, adjusting for the same school level covariates as in 
the student achievement analysis. The results indicated that after adjusting for school 
characteristics, treatment teachers reported a significantly percentage (17.4) of times 
when they applied targeted homework review practice (p < 0.05).  
Relationship between Usage and Learning Outcome. We conducted an explora-
tory analysis using the three-level hierarchical linear regression model using usage in-
dicators to predict student achievement. Two usage indicators, total number of prob-
lems completed by students, and total number of assignments at the classroom level, 
are positively related to student performance on MRT. The results indicate that more 
homework assigned by the teacher through the ASSISTments platform is associated 
with higher math achievement (p = .029). More problems completed by a student is 
also associated with higher math achievement (p < .001). 
6 
Conclusion 
Improving mathematics education is an important educational challenge. Many tech-
nology solutions have been developed and demonstrated evidence of promise during 
pilot studies, but many stayed in the research stage and very few have been effectively 
implemented in authentic school settings on a large scale for extended periods of time. 
In this paper, we reported on a large-scale efficacy study that explicitly adopted planned 
variation to test the impact of the ASSISTments program under a variety of setting and 
implementation characteristics. Particularly, we shared the procedures the team took to 
introduce the researcher-developed, free program to middle school teachers, and ap-
proaches to ensure consistency and faithful implementation of the program.  
The results of our analyses suggested ASSISTments helped teachers practice the key 
aspects of rich in-depth formative assessment-driven instruction, and more use of the 
program was associated with higher student math achievement but didn’t provide fur-
ther evidence of the replicability of student learning impact on the selected measure.  
The reported results are bound by several limitations related to the disruption of 
classroom instruction brought on by the onset of the COVID pandemic, including the 
unexpected alteration to the implementation model for ASSISTments and a shortening 
of the expected duration of the use of the intervention. The replacement outcome meas-
ure was not part of the state accountability assessment program and was administered 
at home during a time when teachers and schools were struggling to put together an 
instruction plan to engage students. Thus, the study experienced significant attrition in 
outcome data collection. Further analysis is ongoing to compare the sample, school 
context, implementation dosage, and counterfactuals between the original Maine study 
and the current study, and to better understand the nature of use of ASSISTments before 
and during the COVID pandemic.  

11 
Acknowledgement 
This material is based on work supported by the Institute of Education Sciences of 
the U.S. Department of Education under Grant R305A170641. Any opinions, findings, 
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors 
and do not necessarily reflect the funders. 
References 
1. Heffernan, N. & Heffernan, C. (2014). The ASSISTments Ecosystem: Building a Platform 
that Brings Scientists and Teachers Together for Minimally Invasive Research on Human 
Learning and Teaching. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education. 24 (4), 
470-497. DOI 10.1007/s40593-014-0024-x.  
2. Roschelle, J., Feng, M., Murphy, R., & Mason, C. (2016). Online mathematics homework 
increases student achievement. AERA Open Oct 2016, 2 (4) 2332858416673968; DOI: 
10.1177/2332858416673968.  
3. Murphy, R., Roschelle, J., Feng, M., & Mason, C. (2020). Investigating Efficacy, Modera-
tors and Mediators for an Online Mathematics Homework Intervention, Journal of Research 
on Educational Effectiveness. DOI: 10.1080/19345747.2019.1710885 
4. Sahni, S. D., Polanin, J. R., Zhang, Q., Michaelson, L. E., Caverly, S., Polese, M. L., & 
Yang, J. (2021). A What Works Clearinghouse Rapid Evidence Review of Distance Learn-
ing Programs. U.S. Department of Education. 
5. Escueta, M., Quan, V., Nickow, A. J., & Oreopoulos, P. (2017). Education Technology: An 
Evidence-Based Review. NBER Working Paper No. 23744. August 2017 JEL No. 
I20,I29,J24. Retrieved from http://tiny.cc/NBER  
6. Pashler, H., Bain, P. M., Bottge, B. A., Graesser, A., Koedinger, K., McDaniel, M., et al. 
(2007). Organizing instruction and study to improve student learning. IES practice guide 
(NCER 2007-2004). Washington, D.C.: National Center for Education Research. 
7. Heritage, M., & Popham, W. J. (2013). Formative assessment in practice: A process of in-
quiry and action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press. 
8. Koedinger, K. R., Booth, J. L., & Klahr, D. (2013). Instructional complexity and the science 
to constrain it. Science, 342(6161), 935–937. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1238056. 
9. Hattie, J., & Timperley, H. (2007). The power of feedback. Review of educational research, 
77(1), 81-112. 
10. DiBattista, D., Gosse, L., Sinnige-Egger, J. A., Candale, B., & Sargeson, K. (2009). Grading 
scheme, test difficulty, and the immediate feedback assessment technique. The Journal of 
Experimental Education, 77(4), 311-338. 
11. Mendicino, M., Razzaq, L., & Heffernan, N. T. (2009). A comparison of traditional home-
work to computer supported homework. Journal of Research on Technology in Education 
(JRTE). 41(3), 331–358. 
12. Fyfe, E. R., & Rittle-Johnson, B. (2016). The benefits of computer-generated feedback for 
mathematics problem solving. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 147, 140-151. 
13. Kehrer, P. & Kelly, Kim & Heffernan, Neil. (2013). Does immediate feedback while doing 
homework improve learning? FLAIRS 2013 - Proceedings of the 26th International Florida 
Artificial Intelligence Research Society Conference. 542-545. 
14. Kelly, K., Heffernan, N., Heffernan, C., Goldman, S., Pellegrino, J., & Soffer-Goldstein, D. 
(2014). Improving student learning in math through web-based homework review. In 
Liljedahl, P., Nicol, C., Oesterle, S., & Allan, D. (Eds.). (2014). Proceedings of the Joint 
Meeting of PME 38 and PME-NA 36 (Vol. 3). Vancouver, Canada: PME. pp. 417-424. 

12 
15. Black, P., & Wiliam, D. (2018). Classroom assessment and pedagogy. Assessment in edu-
cation: Principles, policy & practice, 25(6), 551-575. 
16. Bennett, R.E. (2011). Formative assessment: A critical review. Assessment in Education: 
Principles, Policy & Practice, 18 (1) (2011), pp. 5-25.  
17. Dunn, K.E, & Mulvenon, S.W. (2009). A critical review of research on formative assess-
ment: The limited scientific evidence of the impact of formative assessment in education. 
Practical Assessment, Research and Evaluation, 14 (7) (2009), pp. 1-11 
18. OECD (2005), Formative Assessment: Improving Learning in Secondary Classrooms, 
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264007413-en. 
19. Wiliam, D., & Thompson, M. (2007). Integrating assessment with learning: what will it take 
to make it work? In C.A. Dwyer (Ed.), The future of assessment: Shaping teaching and 
learning (pp. 53–82). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
20. Faber, J. M., Luyten, H., & Visscher, A. J. (2017). The effects of a digital formative assess-
ment tool on mathematics achievement and student motivation: Results of a randomized 
experiment. Computers & Education, 106 , 83-96. 
21. Koedinger, K. R., McLaughlin, E. A., & Heffernan, N. T. (2010). A quasi-experimental 
evaluation of an on-line formative assessment and tutoring system. Journal of Educational 
Computing Research, 43(4), 489e510. http://dx.doi.org/10.2190/EC.43.4.d 
22. Sheard, M., Chambers, B., & Elliott, L. (2012). Effects of technology-enhanced formative 
assessment on achievement in primary grammar. Retrieved from the University of York 
website https://www.york.ac.uk/media/iee/documents/QfLGrammarReport_Sept2012.pdf. 
23. Anderson, J. R. (2000). Learning and memory: An integrated approach (2nd ed.). New 
York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
24. Koedinger, K., & Aleven, V. (2007). Exploring the assistance dilemma in experiments with 
Cognitive Tutors. Educational Psychology Review, 19, 239–264. 
25. Rohrer, D. (2009). The effects of spacing and mixing practice problems. Journal for Re-
search in Mathematics Education, 40, 4–17. 
26. Rohrer, D., & Taylor, K. (2007). The shuffling of mathematics practice problems improves 
learning. Instructional Science, 35, 481–498. 
27. Rohrer, D., & Pashler, H. (2007). Increasing retention without increasing study time. Cur-
rent Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 183-186. 
28. Fairman, J., Porter, M., Fisher, S. (2015). Principals Discuss Early Implementation of the 
ASSISTments Online Homework Tutor for Mathematics: ASSISTments Efficacy Study Re-
port 2. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International. 
29. Loveless, T. (2014). The 2014 Brown Center Report on American Education: How well are 
American students learning? The Brown Center on Education Policy. Washington, DC: The 
Brookings Institution.  
30. Bennett, S., & Kalish, N. (2006). The case against homework: How homework is hurting 
our children and what we can do about it. New York, NY: Crown Publishers. 
31. Kohn, A. (2006). The homework myth: Why our kids get too much of a bad thing. Cam-
bridge, MA: Da Capo Press. 
32. Pope, D (2020, August 27). Making Homework Work. ASCD. Retrieved October 20, 2021.  
