EdTech in Developing Countries:
A Review of the Evidence
Daniel Rodriguez-Segura
The emergence of educational technology (“EdTech”) in developing countries has been re-
ceived as a promising avenue to address some of the most challenging policy questions within
educational systems. In this paper, I review and synthesize all existing studies with credi-
ble causal identification frameworks of EdTech interventions in developing countries. While
otherstudiesreviewtheevidenceforEdTechinterventionsindevelopedcountries,thereiscur-
rently no equivalent study for developing contexts, in spite of the rising number of studies
being produced. I classify studies into four thematic categories based on the type of EdTech
intervention analyzed: Access to technology; technology-enabled behavioral interventions;
improvements to instruction; and self-led learning. I find that EdTech interventions centered
around self-led learning and improvements to instruction are the most effective forms of
EdTech at raising learning outcomes. Similarly, technology-enabled behavioral interventions
are less promising for generating large effects but highly cost-effective given their typically
low marginal costs. Although expanding access to technology alone is not sufficient to im-
provelearning,itisanecessaryfirststepforsomeothertypesof interventions.Morebroadly,
the overall success of interventions rests on the thoughtful customization of the EdTech solu-
tion to the policy constraints at hand. Finally, EdTech interventions across all thematic areas
can and should act as complements by leveraging their respective comparative advantages to
address deficiencies within educational systems in developing countries.
JEL Codes: I21: Analysis of Education, I25: Education and Economic Development,
O32: Management of Technological Innovation and R&D
Keywords: EdTech, education policy, developing countries, innovation, cost-
effectiveness.
Introduction
As technology evolves, the frontier of its potential applications also expands. The ed-
ucation sector is no exception to this, and technology has become an ever more basic
The World Bank Research Observer
© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development / THE WORLD BANK. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
https://doi.org/10.1093/wbro/lkab011
37:171–203
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

input into the provision and growth of educational services over past decades. With
recent expansions of the education systems in many developing countries, and the
accompanying lagging outcomes in terms of learning, retention, graduation rates,
and socioeconomic equity, investments in educational technology or “EdTech” are re-
garded as a promising option to boost these outcomes. In particular, I define EdTech as
any application of information and communication technologies in education. This
includes,butisnotlimitedto,thedistributionof existingtechnology,1 theprovisionof
devices with tailored software,2 the adaptation of existing and already-owned tech-
nologies,3 andtheuseof specializedsoftwareincommunalcomputers.4 Throughthis
working definition, the current study attempts to capture the breadth and depth of
the current landscape of EdTech in developing countries, in terms of actual products,
but also markets, countries, and target populations.
Before adopting and adapting EdTech interventions, policy makers and educa-
tionalstakeholdersneedtobeinformedaboutwhatkindof EdTechinterventionshave
displayed the most promise for different outcomes, populations, and sets of circum-
stances. Given the wide-ranging and emerging nature of the EdTech field, locating
and analyzing all the extant EdTech literature is not a trivial step for researchers and
practitioners alike. As a response to this need, Escueta et al. (2020) offer a thorough
example of a meta-review that surveys EdTech’s effects on educational outcomes, fo-
cusing on developed countries. However, the most pressing challenges in the educa-
tional systems of developing countries look very different to those of developed coun-
tries. Furthermore, the kind of EdTech intervention that could actually be deployed
in different contexts is very different due to issues related to access to technology and
public infrastructure. As a response to all these factors, Escueta et al. (2020) men-
tion that “after considering both literatures, we determined that the circumstances
surrounding the ed-tech interventions that have so far been experimentally studied
differed too greatly across developed and developing country education systems to
allow for integrating findings from both in a way that would yield meaningful policy
implications.” In short, the actual effectiveness and focus of successful EdTech inter-
ventions in developed countries may translate to very different results in developing
countries, calling for an urgent need to understand the patterns within the EdTech
literature focusing exclusively on developing countries.
To shed light on the promise and limitations of EdTech specifically in developing
countries, the current review synthesizes the patterns and lessons found in the ex-
tant literature rigorously evaluated in low- and middle-income countries. The search
methods included thorough searches in scientific repositories, working paper series
from renowned research and international organizations, forward and backward
tracing from key papers, and from all papers that were subsequently added to the
list. In all, this review identifies 81 “core studies” across 36 low and middle-income
countriessince2002,5 spanningfivedifferentmethodologies,withthreeinfourbeing
randomized controlled trials (RCTs). In order to thematically group findings, the core
172
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 37, no. 2 (2022)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

studies are organized and analyzed thematically across four different areas: Access to
technology; technology-enabled behavioral interventions; improvements to instruc-
tion; and self-led learning. The specific research questions explored throughout this
review are as follows: (a) Across what particular thematic areas and outcomes of edu-
cation has EdTech displayed the most promise in developing countries? (b) What type
of EdTech interventions does the current literature suggest that have little to no effec-
tiveness on learning? (c) Under what contextual circumstances do the different types
of EdTech interventions work best in developing countries? (d) What are the current
gaps and frontiers in the scientific knowledge about EdTech in developing countries?
(e) How do different cost structures and levels of cost-effectiveness influence the po-
tential for scalability of an intervention?
Why EdTech in Developing Countries?
EdTech has started to play a role in the education of millions of children in developing
countries. The Chinese market almost reached USD 2 billion in early 2019 (EdSurge
2019), and by some estimates the Indian market is expected to reach this mark by
2021 (Sampson et al. 2019). Globally, the EdTech industry was valued at USD 17.7
billion in 2017, with expectations for a quick increase in value in following years
(Frost & Sullivan 2017). The role of EdTech in children’s lives became more salient
during the school closures induced by the COVID-19 pandemic worldwide, when
governments and international organizations called for EdTech solutions as part of
the bundle of at-home activities children might have available to minimize learning
losses. In spite of the growing influence of the industry, this expansion does not reflect
other important metrics such as a more egalitarian reach to all learners in develop-
ing countries, or the incorporation of rigorously-tested technologies. A recent analy-
sis of the EdTech Hub database with EdTech firms from around the world (Crawfurd
2020) shows that only 19 million out of over 450 million children in Africa were us-
ing any kind of EdTech before the pandemic. Furthermore, most of these users were
concentrated around a few leading companies in a handful of countries, or around
students watching educational programs on T.V. Over half of all EdTech firms serving
developing countries, based on a widely-publicized database, are located in just three
countries: South Africa, Kenya, and Nigeria.
Similarly, Crawfurd also points out that the potential market size matters for the ex-
tent to which EdTech innovation develops. The most obvious driver of market size is
the number of young people in a country, as Crawfurd shows. However, the potential
market size could be driven by other factors such as language or household income.
Developing an app that promotes early literacy in English or Kiswahili will have a
much larger potential market than an app promoting the same outcome in Xhosa.
While shared languages across countries might incentivize EdTech developers to pro-
duce tools tailored to these major languages, they could also lead to intra-country
Rodriguez-Segura
173
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

inequalities for minority language speakers. Similarly, the presence of emerging
purchasing power from low- and middle-class families can play a determining role in
the decision to invest in an EdTech product. While countries with large populations
like the Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, or Bangladesh may benefit from in-
vestments in EdTech, the very low average household income, even for the standards
of developing countries, might make it less appealing for private companies to invest
in those contexts. Likewise, given that the EdTech industry has mostly been driven by
the private sector up to this point, these inequalities could also emerge at an intra-
country level from differences in disposable income across socioeconomic groups, in-
creasing prevalent educational gaps within countries.
There are reasons to be both optimistic and skeptical about the effectiveness of
EdTechindevelopingcountries.Whiletherelativelylowlevelsof accesstoinputssuch
as electricity, the internet, and hardware might be challenges that hinder EdTech’s
promise, EdTech may also be particularly well-suited to addressing some of the most
critical educational questions in these contexts. In particular, EdTech could be lever-
aged to address problems that would be too costly or resource-intensive to solve
through other channels. For instance, EdTech could be adopted to address issues of
appropriately-leveled education to deliver instruction and practice problems tailored
at each student’s specific level. Such a challenge would be almost insurmountable
with the current incentives and levels of educational resources, in contexts with al-
ready extremely high pupil-teacher ratios. EdTech could also be used to address issues
of stakeholder accountability, such as with the implementation of cameras that mon-
itor teacher absenteeism, and replace less-frequent but more-expensive school inspec-
tions. Furthermore, EdTech could be used to address some of the input shortages that
many schools face. Simple handheld devices could be used to replace lacking inputs
such as computers, textbooks, notebooks, teacher records, and teaching guides, as
a single device could perform these functions by holding many documents at once.
However, the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of all these interventions have not
been systematically reviewed, and hence remain an open empirical question.
On the other hand, EdTech could face important shortcomings both in terms of
take-up and implementation in developing countries.6 One initial challenge is that
the low levels of penetration of other technologies could hinder the level of famil-
iarity with the platforms on which EdTech tools are deployed, and hence obstruct
the effectiveness of an otherwise well-designed intervention. While most countries
are approaching universal access to electricity, Sub-Saharan Africa still stands at 48
percent, lagging far behind the 98 percent in Latin America and the Caribbean, and
the 92 percent in South Asia (World Bank 2018).7 Only one in four people in Sub-
Saharan Africa have access as of 2018, and in India alone there were 475 million
people not using the internet in 2018 (World Bank 2018).8 At the even more local
level of schools, there are large global gaps in terms of access to technology. For exam-
ple, in Cambodia, Nepal, and Myanmar, less than 10 percent of all primary schools
174
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 37, no. 2 (2022)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

have access to electricity (UNESCO 2012).9 Less than 10 percent of all schools have
access to the internet in Sri Lanka, the Philippines, Kyrgyzstan, and Bangladesh (UN-
ESCO 2012).10 Even the presence of computer hardware at the school level is rare
in some countries: in Niger and Zambia, there are over 500 students per computer
in a school, and in India, fewer than 20 percent of all schools have hardware for
individual-use products (Sampson et al. 2019). Naturally, access to technologies is
not only an issue of inequality between countries, but also within countries. While
these intra-country inequalities can be ameliorated by higher levels of penetration,
some of the most common inputs in EdTech interventions are still unlikely to reach
the most deprived sectors of society in developing countries. In countries like Mexico
orPeru,94percentof householdsinthetopincomequintilehaveaccesstocomputers
athome,whilelessthan10percentof allhouseholdsinthebottomincomequintiledo
(Rieble et al. 2020). Moreover, it is often the case that technologically disadvantaged
groups within each country are also those for which educational outcomes lag the
most. These are critical considerations for the study and implementation of EdTech
interventions in developing countries: EdTech program administrators will need to
either assess and cater to the local supply of technological tools, or incorporate the
provision of infrastructure and hardware.
Similarly, implementation of even well-designed programs could be especially diffi-
cult in areas with weak state capability. Either through explicit corruption leading to
leakages of equipment and funds, or through poor executing capacity, weak state ca-
pacity may be a barrier towards fruitful investment in EdTech. The most cynical view
is that if these governments have not been able to provide other basic inputs like text-
books and chalk to all schools, the extent to which they can deploy successful EdTech
interventions is highly questionable. In all, this review examines the extent to which
EdTech can address some of the most serious educational challenges in developing
countries, and how it could also be hindered by specific contextual factors.
Overview of Methods for This Review
This paper is conceptualized as a comprehensive review of the evidence in devel-
oping countries. As such, extensive search methods with clear inclusion criteria
were employed. The inclusion criteria spanned papers which use experimental or
quasi-experimental evaluation methods, involved a technological tool to address a
policy issue around education, and were set in a developing country. There were
no restrictions on the publication stage, academic field, or date of publication. This
search yielded 81 eligible papers. An online appendix contains detailed descriptions
of the search methods, inclusion criteria, and characteristics of papers included. Sim-
ilarly, the online appendix contains the full coding and summary tables of all papers
(Tables S5–S8, and Figures S1.2–S1.5).
Rodriguez-Segura
175
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

The studies identified reflect significant diversity in the types of treatments,
contexts, targeted stakeholders, and scale of interventions. To thematically group
the patterns in the literature, I followed a similar classification to that used by
Escueta et al. (2020). I classify papers into four mutually exclusive categories re-
flecting the broad themes of the design features and educational goals in each in-
tervention: “Access to technology,” “Technology-enabled behavioral interventions,”
“Improvements to instruction,” and “Self-led learning”. Interestingly, the four the-
matic categories of Escueta et al. (2020) do not fully overlap with the categories for
this review,11 as the type of intervention and issues addressed in the current body
of literature varies greatly between developed and developing countries. In practice,
studies may not neatly or exclusively fit into one category or the other. For instance,
an argument could be made that all the “One-Laptop-per-Child” (OLPC) interven-
tions, like those in Beuermann et al. (2015), Cristia et al. (2017), de Melo (2014), and
Cordero-Meza (2017), were ultimately about “self-led learning” at home, not neces-
sarily access to technology. However, given that the most proximate goal of the project
was to increase children’s access to technology, these were categorized as “access.” Ul-
timately, this classification allows for a broader exercise of finding patterns and policy
lessons across similar interventions, which is the goal of the current paper.
What Are the Main Patterns in the Existing Literature?
Access to Technology
Much policy and research attention has been devoted to the issue of access to tech-
nology. In fact, approximately one-quarter of reviewed studies focused on access to
technology. In theory, access to EdTech could ameliorate the prevalent lack of other
inputs like books, blackboards, or notebooks by consolidating these inputs into sin-
gle devices that could be used by several students. The lack of these traditional in-
puts in the developing world can be very binding. In Niger and Nigeria, less than
half of all students had paper to write on, and in Togo there were approximately 66
students per math textbook (SDI 2010–2014). Similarly, between 2013–2016, only
one in five schools in Tanzania had a library with books (Mbiti et al. 2019a; Mbiti
et al. 2019b; Mbiti et al. 2019c). These large global inequalities in access have mo-
tivated initiatives such as the highly popular “One-laptop-per-child” (OLPC), where
governments, donors, and NGOs aim to have a computer-pupil ratio of one to one,
either through the direct provision of laptops to students or through classroom sets
large enough for each child to have a laptop to themselves. Investments to increase
students’ access to technology at school have also become a clear policy priority for
even the lowest-income countries (Kozma and Surya Vota 2014). In spite of the push
to improve access to technology, the evidence of its effectiveness to improve learn-
ing is at best mixed, and realistically does not suggest that the mere provision of
176
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 37, no. 2 (2022)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

technological tools translates directly into higher academic achievement. For in-
stance, none of the evaluations of the OLPC initiatives across Latin America found
significant results on scholastic outcomes (Barrera-Osorio and Linden [2009] in
Colombia; Beuermann et al. [2015], Cristia et al. [2010, 2017], in Peru; de Melo et al.
[2014] in Uruguay; and Meza-Cordero [2017] in Costa Rica). Similarly, a long-term
follow up of the OLPC in Uruguay also finds null results on educational attainment
(Yanguas 2020). Similarly, Bando et al. (2017) find that replacing regular textbooks
for laptops in Honduras had no statistically-significant effect on learning, and costs
about USD 48 more per student than the status quo. A qualitative study in Brazil
(Lavinas and Veiga 2013), not included in the set of core studies, also reviews the
results of the OLPC initiative in Brazil, and finds that the persistent under-utilization
of the computers and lack of teacher training on how to incorporate the equipment
into daily instruction hindered the potential of the project. Similarly, Barrera-Osorio
and Linden (2009) find that the most problematic step is the actual incorporation of
computers into the instructional process.
The presence of null results for most OLPC interventions does not necessarily im-
ply that if students are provided with computers, they did not use them: in spite of
the lack of positive effects on grades, Meza-Cordero (2017) finds that OLPC students
experienced an increase in the amount of time they spent using a computer, at the
expense of time doing other activities like homework and outdoor activities. Indeed,
studies such as Angrist and Lavy (2002) and Malamud and Pop-Eleches (2011) find
negative effects on academic outcomes as a result to the provision of technology to
students. In spite of the negative to null effects on academic learning as a result of
increasing access to technology, there is evidence to believe that this kind of inter-
vention can improve computer skills and familiarity with technology. In particular,
Mo et al. (2013), Bet et al. (2014), Malamud et al. (2019), Malamud and Pop-Eleches
(2011), and Beuermann et al. (2015) find that the exposure to technology led to an
improvement in familiarity with technology; this is seen up to an increase of 0.30
standard deviations (SD) in “digital skills” in the case of Bet et al. (2014). If digi-
tal skills are also considered a valuable outcome from this type of intervention, then
there is more evidence to suggest that exposure to tools like computers naturally in-
creases students’ familiarity with technology and digital skills than there is to suggest
that these technologies can raise test scores by themselves.
There were four interventions providing handheld devices, with more mixed re-
sults than the provision of computers. While Pitchford (2015) and Mensch and
Haberland (2018) find positive effects on learning of the handheld devices, Habya-
rimana and Sabarwal (2018) find null effects. Piper et al. (2016) find that the treat-
ment arms providing a literacy program plus handheld devices for teachers or stu-
dents were at most as effective, and less cost-effective, than the base literacy program.
Among these four interventions, the two with the strongest case for the use of tech-
nology, Pitchford (2015) and Mensch and Haberland (2018), also had an important
Rodriguez-Segura
177
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

element of in-person support. In the case of Pitchford (2015), teachers and volun-
teers supported the use of the tablets with mathematical content, and in the case of
Mensch and Haberland (2018), the provision of e-readers was complemented with
routine group meetings. On the other hand, a treatment branch of Habyarimana and
Sabarwal (2018) included content tailored to the national curriculum, but there was
no in-person support for the users of the handheld devices. These results highlight
again that the mere provision of hardware may not be enough if it is not accompa-
nied by proper in-person pedagogy or encouragement.
The most salient exceptions in terms of raising student achievement levels within
the category of access to education were the three papers looking at the effect of
large-scale interventions providing high-level access to technology. Specifically, these
three papers were Kho et al. (2018), with the large-scale provision of internet access
in public schools in Peru; Navarro-Sola (2019) in in the case of telesecundarias in
Mexico;12 and Seo (2017) with the electrification and provision of instruction-
enhancing tools in Tanzania. All of these interventions were targeted at a much
larger scale than specific individuals or schools, and consisted of helping deprived re-
gions catch up technologically with other areas within the country, as opposed to the
provision of more advanced technologies which are not as widespread within each
country, such as OLPC. These interventions may represent suggestive evidence that
large-scale, infrastructure-enhancing interventions in underprivileged areas may
be effective in complementing students’ education and narrowing within-country
inequalities, such as in the cases of Seo (2017) and Kho et al. (2018). Similarly, in
spite of the global increase in school enrollment, many countries have not achieved
universal enrollment, and these “last-mile-enrollments” may indeed be the hardest
to enroll. In areas of high remoteness and low population density, a formal school
may be logistically difficult to establish. In these cases, policy makers and researchers
alike will need to consider alternate solutions, including EdTech interventions like
telesecundarias if the infrastructure allows it, to achieve universal enrollment.
In all, it seems unlikely that the mere provision of hardware will yield improved
learning outcomes, as Sampson et al. (2019) also point out. In fact, the median effect
of all the studies included in this category is an imprecise null effect. Even more impor-
tantly, when these interventions are provided at the student level like in Angrist and
Lavy (2002), or Malamud and Pop-Eleches (2011), as opposed to the mass construc-
tion of infrastructure, they also tend to also be very costly. The very low gains in learn-
ing coupled with the high price tag of these interventions should make policy makers
weary of programs that simply increase access to technology, with the important ex-
ception of programs that are explicitly intended to increase digital skills. Access to
technology is a necessary, but not sufficient, requirement for the implementation of
other kinds of EdTech interventions. This finding agrees with other comprehensive
reviews of evidence, which have found that interventions that simply address these
input constraints through “supply-side” provisions (Masino and Niño-Zarazua 2016;
178
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 37, no. 2 (2022)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

McEwan 2015; Ganimian and Murnane 2016; Glewwe and Muralidharan 2016),
by lowering implicit and explicit costs of schooling (such as the provision of school
uniforms, as in Evans and Ngatie 2020), or by providing better school supplies (as in
Glewwe et al. 2009), do not lead to improved learning.
While inputs themselves may not be enough to raise learning standards, they can
act as augmenting complements to any learning-oriented intervention, including
EdTech (Sampson et al. 2019). As long as interventions that increase access to tech-
nology are either well-accompanied by pedagogical tools, or designed as a stepping-
stone for other type of interventions, they should remain in the menu of options for
policy makers in some form. Still, policy makers should also consider the trade-off of
implementinginterventionsthatincreaseaccesstotechnologytothenimplementan-
other type of EdTech intervention, versus simply designing the second intervention
around more prevalent technologies such as SMS messages, phone calls to feature
phones, or radio instruction.13
Technology-Enabled Behavioral Interventions
Shaping human behavior is a less straightforward endeavor than the provision of
technological inputs. This requires deep knowledge about the specific constraints to
be relieved, the availability of a channel through which behavior-shaping incentives
can flow, and a well-designed intervention informed by a credible theory of change.
Nevertheless, interventions that incentivize behavior are promising avenues to shape
systemic issues in a cost-effective manner. In this section, I begin by reviewing in-
terventions aimed at affecting teacher behavior, and then interventions that shape
parental and student behavior.
High rates of teacher absenteeism, and low rates of on-task instruction are an in-
grained and prevalent policy issue in many developing countries. For example, the
teacher absenteeism rate was around 24 percent in India in 2010, representing a fis-
cal burden of about USD 1.5 billion per year (Muralidharan et al. 2010). In Kenya,
only 43 percent of the time during which teachers are expected to be teaching is
spent actively engaging in class, and in Mozambique, students only get about 1 hour
and 33 minutes of instruction every day due to the low rates of instructional on-
task time from teachers (SDI 2010–2014). This policy challenge was tackled by both
Gaduh et al. (2020) in Indonesia and Duflo et al. (2012) in India, by providing cam-
eras with timestamps, and teachers were required to take frequent pictures with their
students to prove that they were indeed in school. Furthermore, both interventions
conditioned at least a portion of teachers’ pay to their presence in school, as veri-
fied by the cameras. Both interventions proved effective, raising students’ test scores
by 0.17–0.20 SD. In the case of Gaduh et al. (2020), the treatment arm with the
camera was one of the treatment arms (among others) that also sought to increase
school-level accountability, such as the public dissemination of scorecards. Although
Rodriguez-Segura
179
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

the camera treatment arm was the most effective at raising student outcomes, the
other two treatment arms were also effective. Furthermore, there was suggestive evi-
dencethatthecameraindeedledtochangesinteacherbehavior,emergingasapoten-
tial mechanism for the increased test scores. These findings stand in sharp contrast to
other more traditional channels expected to increase teacher effort such as salary in-
creases. In fact, an intervention that doubled teachers’ salaries on a permanent basis
in Indonesia (de Ree et al. 2018) led to precisely zero improvements in student learn-
ing. In this sense, EdTech could prove a valuable tool in shaping teacher accountabil-
ity and performance, potentially even more so than other traditional channels like
salary increases, if the right behavioral constraints are targeted by the technology.
In spite of these successes, implementation and take-up do play a major role in the
success of this kind of intervention. For instance, Adelman et al. (2015) implemented
an intervention in Haiti which had, as one of its components, a platform where teach-
ers could send daily photographs to verify their presence, similar to Duflo et al. (2012)
and Gaduh et al. (2020). The authors highlight the very low take-up of the program,
and that serious logistical challenges at the time of implementation ended up ham-
pering the effectiveness of the intervention. For instance, the authors mention that
“The program faced challenges from the start, including delays and technical prob-
lems that made it hard to implement it as planned” and “There were so many prob-
lems getting schools ready for the pilot that the program ended up starting months
late [. . .] This short implementation period reduced the chance of seeing any change
in teacher behavior or student learning." Therefore, even if the behavioral interven-
tion is grounded in context-specific constraints, and properly designed based on a re-
alistic theory of change, the support of partners on the ground to ensure compliance
is also key. These considerations around implementation should be taken seriously,
particularly in contexts where state capacity is weak.
In terms of interventions that are intended to provide information as opposed to in-
crease accountability, there are several examples of interventions that were effective,
and highly cost-effective. At the parent level, Berlinski et al. (2016) evaluate a pro-
gram which consisted of high-frequency texting campaigns for parents in Chile, dur-
ing which they were informed about their children’s performance, attendance, and
behavior. The study finds large effects in test scores and attendance after only four
months of the intervention, highlighting the crucial role that solving information
asymmetries between parents and students can play in keeping students accountable
for their school performance. At the student level, interventions like Neilson et al.
(2018a, 2018b) addressed information asymmetries regarding the perceived returns
to education (such as those documented in Jensen 2010), and provided students with
information on the actual returns to education through contextually sensitive videos
and infographics, which also had significant effects on the students’ performance and
aspirations. Similarly, Riley (2017) leverages “role model” effects through the show-
ing of the movie “Queen of Katwe” to Ugandan students, with positive results in the
180
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 37, no. 2 (2022)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

short term. At the teacher and school officer level, interventions like Dustan et al.
(2019) and Vakis and Farfan (2018) also proved successful by sending stakehold-
ers SMS messages with things like reminders about deadlines, framed using insights
from behavioral science such as the inclusion of the recipient’s name in each text. Al-
though most of these informational campaigns have effects on the smaller side (i.e.,
less than 0.10 SD), it is also noteworthy how inexpensive and scalable these inter-
ventions really are. Once a system that automates the sending of messages through
platforms like WhatsApp or even SMS is in place, the marginal cost of adding new
users is extremely low.
Insum,theextantevidencesuggeststhatproperlydesignedandimplementedtech-
nology can shape the behavior of education stakeholders in a way that can be scal-
able and cost-effective, and is indeed a promising area for future research. Given
the smaller size of the effects of information campaigns, this type of intervention
does not emerge as a promising lead reformer of educational systems in developing
countries. However, their high cost-effectiveness and potential for scalability empha-
sizes the need to complement other core educational policies with this kind of inter-
vention, which bridges gaps in knowledge and cognitive bandwidth. An important
feature shared by all these studies was that the information provided is actionable,
relevant for the specific context, and concrete enough to not overwhelm the recipi-
ent, therefore making the translation between new information and improved edu-
cational practices easier. Similarly, interventions aimed at improving accountability
around the stakeholders of education seem promising, albeit more sensitive to chal-
lenges with implementation, monitoring, and scalability. If implemented correctly,
these can achieve large gains in academic outcomes such as in Duflo et al. (2012),
and very high cost-benefits ratios such as in the case of Aker and Ksoll (2019). How-
ever, the support of local partners to design, deploy, and incentivize the take-up of
the intervention is crucial, as best exemplified by Adelman et al. (2015). Instead of a
unified global agenda, this particular area calls for in-depth knowledge of contexts,
and local constraints which may be alleviated through technology-led interventions.
Having said this, options such as the use of technology to aid parents in directly sup-
porting their children’s studies such as in Doss et al. (2018), and the potential for
technological channels to inform students about opportunities and deadlines to fur-
ther their education such as in Castleman and Page (2015), remain fairly unexplored
in developing contexts.
Improvements to Instruction
The “improvements to instruction” category includes all interventions aimed at ad-
dressing any of the constraints that make the quality of teacher instruction not the
best that it could be at boosting learning outcomes. Within this category, I have iden-
tified three main sub-themes: Remote instruction; shaping of classroom instruction;
Rodriguez-Segura
181
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

and remote engagement with teachers and parents. As such, the first sub-theme deals
with connecting students with knowledgeable, engaging, and curriculum-specific
remote instruction. Even when teachers are actively engaging in class, their instruc-
tion could be hindered by their lack of mastery in the knowledge content. For ex-
ample, only two in three teachers in Kenya achieve minimum proficiency in the
content they are supposed to teach, and in Madagascar, less than 2 percent of all
teachers achieve this threshold (SDI 2010–2014). Therefore, even if teachers are en-
gaged in teaching, these numbers question the extent to which teachers, themselves
the product of these educational systems, also possess the foundational numeracy
and literacy skills they are expected to nurture in their students. The issues around
teacher mastery of the content run deep within the structural setup of educational
systems. Factors such as teacher recruitment and deployment in “undesirable” ar-
eas such as remote regions or places of extreme deprivation, lack of regional teacher
formation centers in more rural areas, and lack of incentives for professional develop-
ment may also play a crucial role in this issue and widen intra-country inequalities.14
In this sense, EdTech could step in as a complement or as a substitute for classroom
instruction to fill in content gaps teachers may have, and a substantial portion of
the literature has focused on using technology to bring education to remote places or
schools with generally weak-performing teachers.
Johnston and Ksoll (2017), Naik et al. (2016), and Bianchi et al. (2019) eval-
uate the impact of remote instruction via satellite in Ghana, India, and China
respectively. Interestingly, remote instruction has a long history in development stud-
ies: one of the main precursors of RCTs in their current form was a study on math
instruction using radio broadcast in Nicaragua in 1974 (Searle 1975). As an illus-
tration of the modern form of these interventions, Johnston and Ksoll (2017) evalu-
ated the broadcasting of live instruction via satellite to rural primary school students,
from a recording studio in Accra where qualified teachers would lead the lessons for
students in grades 2–4. All three studies find significant learning gains in at least one
subject. Furthermore, their cost-effectiveness is promising, especially since most of
the costs are fixed, making the marginal costs of additional students or even classes
very low. Among these, Naik et al. (2016) is particularly remarkable due to their ex-
plicit decision to study a program at-scale, reaching almost 2,000 public and private
schools across the entire state of Karnataka. By implementing this program at scale,
the authors lower their per-pupil costs to less than USD 2 per year, without necessarily
compromising the strong learning gains in the order of 0.10 SD–0.40 SD (depending
on the subject). The model of remote instruction was not exclusively tested for live
lessons, but also through audio and video recordings. Studies like Beg et al. (2019),
Näslund-Hadley et al. (2014), and Wennersten et al. (2015), in Pakistan, Paraguay,
and India respectively, also studied the effect of delivering content that complements
classroom instruction through pre-recorded content. For example, Beg et al. (2019)
delivered expert content through pre-recorded content tailored to the local context,
which replaced regular class time and gave teachers tools to review the content of
182
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 37, no. 2 (2022)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

the videos through multiple-choice testing. Näslund-Hadley et al. (2014) was also an
intervention with a high degree of local adaptation, as the content of the recordings
followed the national math curriculum for preschool, and was taught bilingually in
Spanish and Guaraní to mimic the teaching conditions of Paraguayan schools. Along
the same lines of pre-recorded videos, the different evaluations of local adaptations
of Sesame Street for different contexts (Borzekowski [2018]in Tanzania; Borzekowski
and Henry [2010] in Indonesia; Borzekowski et al. [2019a] in Rwanda; Borzekowski
et al. [2019b] in India) also all had positive effects on the early numeracy and liter-
acy skills of young children. Finally, Angrist et al. (2021) explore the effectiveness of
phone-based instruction in Botswana during COVID-induced school closures, show-
ing benefits in the order of 0.12 SD for a weekly 15–20-minute call across a period
of 12 weeks. This model seems especially appealing during emergencies as calls must
be tailored to each student’s level, and phones are highly prevalent in the developing
world.
The second sub-theme within this category was the complementing and shaping
of teacher instruction, as opposed to substitution. The most fitting example is Böh-
mer et al. (2014), which studied an after-school, computer-assisted program in Cape
Town focusing on each student’s particular weaknesses in math, and giving students
agency to pick whichever topics they wanted to work on. This program proved ef-
fective at improving math knowledge, and interestingly, it raised foundational math
knowledge more than it improved the grade-specific knowledge of students. In other
words, by fully customizing the study program to each student’s particular weak-
nesses, this program filled in content gaps that regular instruction might not have
remedied, as foundational math skills were already assumed in the grade students.
Three other interesting studies in this sub-category, which also intersect with the
broader subsection of “Access to technology” are Berlinski and Busso (2017), Lehrer
et al. (2019), and Blimpo et al. (2020). The latter two studies find that providing
technology which also enabled improved instructional methods through features like
lesson scripts (as in Blimpo et al. 2020) led to better test scores in Senegal and The
Gambia respectively. An interesting feature of Blimpo et al. (2020) is that it consists
of a very comprehensive treatment that improves access to technologies for teachers
and students, but is also targeted at improving instruction and student engagement.
Therefore, the researchers cannot untangle the individual effects of each part of the
treatment,andcannotensurethatallthegainsweretrulyduetotheportionstargeted
at improving actual classroom instruction.
Perhaps the most interesting case in this category, and certainly the exception in
terms of effect size and direction, is Berlinski and Busso (2017). This study used 85
high schools across Costa Rica, targeting the seventh-grade math curriculum, and
providing a new non-EdTech instructional approach to encourage “active learning”
in geometry. On top of this basic treatment, the study also tested the overlapping
provision of different technologies such as interactive whiteboards, computer labs,
and computers for each student across the different experimental arms. The authors
Rodriguez-Segura
183
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

find that no treatment arm had positive effects on learning, the intervention that sim-
ply had an instructional change to encourage active learning had negative effects in
the order of -0.17 SD, and the treatment with active learning plus technology has
negative effects in the order of -0.25 SD. Unlike in Adelman et al. (2015) in the pre-
vious section, the teacher take-up for this intervention was high, and it was imple-
mented as expected. Instead, the authors attribute the negative results to worsened
interactions between the teachers and their students, as evidenced by the negative ef-
fects on student discipline, and the teachers’ feelings of worse control over classroom
management. This study acts as a cautionary tale, warning against sudden instruc-
tional and curricular changes, particularly when these come with significant tech-
nological adjustments in the classroom.
The third sub-theme in this category is remote coaching and meetings, as best ex-
emplified by Kotze et al. (2019) and its three-year follow up by Cilliers et al. (2020),
and Wolf et al. (2018), in South Africa and Ghana respectively. These programs lever-
age technology to connect remotely with teachers and parents. In the case of Wolf
et al. (2018), the authors integrate technology as a component in a broader treat-
ment arm which intended to get parents more involved with the intervention. While
the teacher training intervention was less effective when parents were involved, the
bundled treatment does not allow the researchers to tease apart the effect of purely
online meetings. On the other hand, Kotze et al. (2019) explicitly tested a virtual
teacher training module versus an on-site training, in light of questions regarding
the scalability of on-site coaching for teachers. The authors find that they both had
similar positive effects, but the virtual training was slightly cheaper, and signified a
less logistically challenging task to scale than on-site coaching, in spite of the three
year follow-up of the study (Cilliers et al. 2020) showing diminishing returns to vir-
tual coaching in the longer term. Finally, one important consideration for the rollout
of virtual training is that teachers had to be provided with tablets, which even if it is
cheaper than on-site training, may still require access to electricity.
In all, the current evidence points to the fact that the “improvements to instruc-
tion” category is a very promising area for the use of EdTech in developing coun-
tries. In fact, the median effect size among all studies reviewed was 0.28 SD, and the
75th percentile was 0.38 SD. Throughout most of the interventions reviewed here,
the proper identification of contextual binding constraints when it comes to instruc-
tion seems to be a common thread. The design of the intervention around the issue
at hand was key to improving learning levels, whether this constraint was teacher
knowledge or effectiveness, as in the case of Beg et al. (2019), or the scalability of
teacher coaching systems, such as in Kotze et al. (2019) and Cilliers et al. (2020).
A large portion of the studies focused on a model of partially replacing or supple-
mentingsomeclassroominstructionthroughtechnologicaltoolslikelivebroadcasted
lessons, pre-recorded videos, T.V. shows, and audio recordings. This model of EdTech
delivery acknowledges the diminishing returns from teacher instruction in contexts
184
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 37, no. 2 (2022)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

where teachers may not fully master the content they are expected to teach, or cannot
deliver said content to the full range of achievement levels within their classrooms.
Having already discussed the promising role for this type of intervention, it is im-
portant to also mention that none of the papers included here speak to whether
EdTech can fully replace classroom instruction. This is a crucial question, especially if
schools are not only thought of as places to build academic skills, but also as places of
socioemotionalandpsychologicaldevelopment.Furthermore,giventhekeyroleof lo-
cally identified constraints in the effectiveness of this type of intervention, none of the
papers reviewed seem to suggest that all EdTech interventions that address shortfalls
in instruction through complementing or replacement of time work. In fact, Berlin-
ski and Busso (2017) serves as a stark reminder of an intervention that had negative
effects, only aggravated by the use of technology. While the current literature em-
pirically explores cases of EdTech ameliorating learning through improvements in
instruction, there still needs to be more research on what areas of the classroom ex-
perience are riper for this type of intervention. In other words, if there is at least one
study with negative effects, and other studies with different magnitudes for their posi-
tive effects, there is a possibility that EdTech can play a different role when it comes to
substituting or complementing instruction. Therefore, future areas of research could
explore whether EdTech is more effective at replacing actual instruction or at rein-
forcing instruction through tailored exercises after an actual teacher lecture. Simi-
larly, future research could inform what teacher and school characteristics are more
predictive of effective classroom instruction replacement by EdTech components.
EdTech can also be leveraged to incorporate other changes to instructional meth-
ods. For instance, scripts that provide scaffolded lesson plans to teachers have been
a part of successful interventions in several developing countries (Piper et al. 2018).
Although scripts do not necessarily have to be delivered through a technological de-
vice, education providers such as Bridge International Academies already leverage
handheld devices connected to the internet to routinely deliver structured lessons at-
scale to all of their teachers across several developing countries. While scripts have
been part of promising interventions that have raised literacy outcomes for children,
no impact evaluations of purely teacher scripts were located for this review, much
less as delivered by electronic devices. Similarly, there are no publicly available im-
pact evaluations of different features in teacher scripts and how these affect the qual-
ity of instruction, in spite of the valuable descriptive analyses in Piper et al. (2018)
and Piper and Evans (2020).
Self-Led Learning
The success and cost-effectiveness from the evaluation of the MindSpark soft-
ware in Muralidharan et al. (2019) sparked great interest in technological inter-
ventions that allow students to learn at their own pace and at their own level.
Rodriguez-Segura
185
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

EdTech interventions that enable students to learn at a fitting pace with minimal ex-
ternal support seem particularly enticing, especially in contexts where regular class-
room instruction may not be as effective and there are important resource constraints
in terms of teacher and tutor time to ensure that all children make similar progress.
Furthermore, interventions that target “self-led learning” have been one of the main
areas of EdTech research, accounting for one-third of all core studies identified by this
review, and dating back to at least 2003 (Rosas et al. in Chile). While it is difficult to
draw a sharp distinction between “self-led learning” and “improvements to instruc-
tion,” the general spirit of “self-led learning” is precisely interventions that students
can do mostly on their own without intensive supervision, and that do not necessar-
ily intend to improve the overall classroom instruction as a mechanism to achieve
higher learning, but rather to deliver content directly to students. Similarly, unlike
in the “access to technology” category, most of the interventions in this category did
not provide students with the hardware or the devices to engage with the interven-
tion and instead, most self-led activities were software-oriented. While it would be
possible to implement an intervention that merges “access to technology” and “self-
led learning” at an individual level (e.g., through the provision of a handheld device
with appropriate self-led software installed), most of the interventions in this category
leveraged technology at the school level. By targeting communal sharing of the hard-
ware to implement self-led interventions, the marginal costs spread out further than
initiatives like OLPC, as this allows several students to use the same hardware during
a school year, and then for several cohorts to keep using it until it fully depreciates.
Studies in this category aim to address important policy challenges shared by many
developing countries. Recent decades have seen large increases in enrollment rates
across the world, as the number of pupils in primary school increased by 350 million
between 1970 and 2018 (World Bank).15 This overall positive trend poses the distinct
challengeof heightenedpressureonalreadystrainedschoolresourcesandpersonnel.
While the number of in-school children in low-income countries rapidly increased af-
ter 2000, the pupil-teacher ratio remained largely the same—three times larger than
that of high-income countries—displaying the system’s capacity to barely catch up
in terms of teacher recruitment. As Duflo et al. (2011) point out, in practice, the fact
that on average teachers have to deal with 40 pupils at the same time translates into
a lack of bandwidth to cater to all students in their classes, and the wide distribution
of achievement levels that comes with these students. This situation is worsened by
external political incentives to focus on high-performers and to teach to the top stu-
dents within classes (Glewwe et al. 2009), and by “overambitious and fast-moving
curricula,” which move faster, and aim higher than the realistic amount of material
that could be taught within the contextual constrains (Pritchett and Beatty 2015).
Ultimately, these pressures accentuate the increased within-country, within-school,
and within-class inequalities that widened after these enrollment increases. There-
fore, if EdTech products can directly customize “instruction” to each student’s level,
186
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 37, no. 2 (2022)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

or allow teachers to focus on specific groups of students while other students are en-
gaging with appropriate practice exercises on technological platforms, EdTech could
be a very valuable tool to narrow learning and instructional inequalities.
Interestingly, the majority of all studies in this section had at least one treatment
arm with positive effects on learning. In fact, the median effect size in this category
is 0.29 SD, and the 75th percentile is 0.46 SD. Therefore, the bulk of the evidence
in this section does not revolve around whether there is a model of self-led learning
which works, but rather around how different design features of self-led learning in-
terventions moderate the effects that these have on learning outcomes. Two impor-
tant exceptions to this are Büchel et al. (2020) and Ma et al. (2020), which instead
of testing a different feature of an EdTech intervention, evaluate an EdTech interven-
tion in relation to a comparable “pencil-and-paper” treatment. In the case of Ma et al.
(2020), the authors highlight that EdTech interventions, particularly those in this
category, tend to happen after school. Therefore, there is a question about whether
any learning gains observed are due to the EdTech portion of the intervention, or
rather due to the additional practice time. The authors find that for their particular
treatment, the EdTech treatment branch is no more effective than the non-EdTech
arm, suggesting that part of the success of interventions in this category may be be-
cause they offer students additional practice time. On the other hand, the authors
of Büchel et al. (2020) test whether students assigned to computer-assisted learning
(CAL) fare better than those in a traditional teaching environment during a weekly,
90-minute intervention, finding that CAL is indeed more effective than traditional
teaching in their context. The contrast between these two interventions may lie in the
contextual counterfactual for each. While the Ma et al. (2020) study was conducted
in China, the Büchel et al. (2020) study was conducted in El Salvador, a country with
a lower development level, and weaker state capacity that may translate into a poorer
traditional classroom experience. Hence, this difference highlights the importance of
clearly understanding the contextual constraint that an EdTech product would ad-
dress, and the resources that it would be displacing if implemented. Having said this,
there may be features inherent to self-led EdTech interventions that can still make
EdTech desirable over non-EdTech interventions, or business-as-usual teaching. For
instance, EdTech software has the capacity to hold a very large number of questions,
with a wide range of difficulty, and with minimum setup and external support, allow-
ing for greater scalability and extended exposure to each intervention.
One of the first design features that the literature touches upon is the dif-
ference between “computer-assisted instruction” (CAI) and “computer-assisted
learning” (CAL). Although some authors use the terms interchangeably, the clear-
est distinction is drawn by Bai et al. (2016). This study defines CAL as not necessarily
integrated into the teachers’ instruction and curriculum, whereas CAI is. In fact, Bai
et al. (2016) test this distinction explicitly in their experimental design, by comparing
CAI and CAL treatment arms to a pure control group, finding suggestive evidence that
Rodriguez-Segura
187
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

CAI was more effective than CAL at raising English test scores. More broadly, other
papers tested one or the other model without explicitly defining their intervention as
CALorCAI.Linden(2008)isaninformativepaperinthisregard,particularlyasitalso
studies the properties of EdTech as supplements or complements to math instruction
in Gujarat, India. Linden (2008) compares a computer-led intervention implemented
as an in-school program (“substitute” for in-class instruction), or out-of-school addi-
tion (“complement” to in-class instruction) on second and third graders. The author
finds that the intervention had negative effects as a supplement to instruction, but
the intervention had positive effects in the order of 0.3 SD when it was used as a com-
plement to reinforce instruction, effectively being used as CAI. Other interventions
such as He et al. (2008) leaned more towards the CAL side, as it was focused on self-
exploration of topics within a specialized device, also yielding positive effects. In this
sense, the difference between these two approaches is not necessarily along the mar-
gin of whether one is strictly better than the other, but which one is better suited for
the task at hand. Work such as Bai et al. (2008), Lai et al. (2013, 2015, 2016), or
Mo et al. (2014a, 2014b) highlights the virtue of CAI as a complement to in-class
instruction and content, while work such as Linden (2008), Bettinger et al. (2020),
Carrillo et al. (2011), Chong et al. (2020), or Rosas et al. (2002) displays the poten-
tial of CAL to reinforce concepts that do not precisely mimic the students’ curriculum
at any specific point in time. For instance, Chong et al. (2020) targets sex education
for Colombian teenagers, and stands as a valuable example of a case when CAL may
be more effective than CAI, especially if the content delivered in class would either be
poorly communicated at school or not taught at all.
Another important design feature that has captured little research attention across
the papers in the set of core studies is the incentives provided to students to engage
with EdTech products. Hirshleifer (2016) is the only study included in this review that
explicitly evaluates two different incentive schemes. Specifically, the author studies
whether rewarding “inputs” or “effort” to engage with an EdTech product is more
effective than rewarding “outputs” or the actual score obtained on the EdTech activ-
ity. Hirshleifer (2016) finds that for their specific intervention, rewarding inputs is
more than twice as effective as rewarding outputs, although both modalities of re-
wards yield important learning gains. However, this paper only deals with one type
of small reward with a maximum value of USD 2.65 per child, and does not test dif-
ferent types of rewards such as social recognition, symbolic gestures of teacher ap-
preciation, or the potential to earn a significantly larger prize. Similarly, work such
as Araya et al. (2019) or Rosas et al. (2002) recognizes the potential for gamification
in driving engagement with an EdTech product. In a qualitative analysis into poten-
tial mechanisms for their lack of significant results, De Hoop et al. (2020b) find that
some characteristics of their product seemed repetitive, and led to boredom for the
students using the software they evaluated. Therefore, including features that touch
upon “gamification” to drive engagement with EdTech products could potentially be
188
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 37, no. 2 (2022)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

an even more cost-effective incentive. Still, so far none of the studies included in this
review explicitly tests the sole effect of features like gamification on the effectiveness
of an EdTech product.
A key component of some EdTech products which has not been evaluated in iso-
lation is the optimal degree of adaptability, i.e., the potential for the product to auto-
identify and adjust the level of difficulty to a student’s specific achievement level. This
particular feature has been a core component of very successful interventions such as
Banerjee et al. (2007), Muralidharan et al. (2019), Ito et al. (2019), and Carrillo et al.
(2011). Given the wide variation in achievement distributions within classrooms in
many developing countries, this feature is one of the most enticing characteristics of
EdTech, and it is hard to imagine that it would be anything but beneficial for each stu-
dent’s learning path. Therefore, the key empirical question around adaptability is not
whether it works or not, but rather what the optimal degree of adaptability is. This is
relevant since there are certainly higher development costs to creating deeper ques-
tion banks with different difficulty levels, and to the ideation of more sophisticated
algorithms to precisely place students within the performance bin that the EdTech
productwouldtarget.Inspiteof thepotentialrelevanceforpolicymakersandproduct
developers, no paper in the current set of core studies directly addresses this question
in a self-led learning intervention.
The final feature discussed in this review for which little evidence currently exists
is the optimal dosage for an intervention.16 All interventions in this category have dif-
ferent lengths for their study sessions, and different numbers of weeks during which
students were a part of the intervention. However, only Bettinger et al. (2020) ex-
plicitly test the effect of different dosages of an EdTech intervention. The authors find
that while the treatment does have positive effects on learning, the full doubling of the
dosage does not have statistically different effects from the baseline intervention. This
finding agrees with the null correlation found between dosage and effect size across
different studies in Sampson et al. (2019). Understanding this relationship is crucial
when deciding not only whether EdTech should be a complement or a supplement to
education, but also to what degree it should be implemented as either. Furthermore,
dosage is an important feature given the nature of self-led interventions, where the
learner must have some autonomy, and the ability to understand how the product
works. An intervention with a long dosage period, but which low-performing stu-
dents struggle to engage with, is likely to have heterogenous effects across the full
distribution of achievement, ultimately benefiting stronger students and widening
within-class and within-school inequality. In fact, Carrillo et al. (2011) and He et al.
(2008) observe that higher-performing students perform better in their self-paced in-
tervention. Therefore, the suitability of the treatment for the specific context, adapt-
ability for different learning levels, and crucially, the right dosage for everyone’s needs
are pivotal elements to ensure that self-led EdTech interventions can cater and boost
educational outcomes for all students.
Rodriguez-Segura
189
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Lessons Learned and Frontiers of the Current Evidence
The current review provides a comprehensive compilation of rigorously evaluated
EdTech interventions in developing countries. By thematically grouping all 81 core
studies, broader lessons can be drawn for future research and implementation of
EdTech interventions, as synthesized in table 1. Among the four categories, the most
promising areas in raising learning outcomes in absolute terms were “improvements
to instruction” and “self-led learning.” The overall success of these two areas rested
on the customization of the EdTech solution to the constraint at hand. The studies in-
cluded in “improvements to instruction” addressed more systematic constraints such
as weak teacher quality in certain remote areas or teaching coaching through scal-
able, virtual means. The “self-led learning” studies focused more on a direct links con-
necting students to learning through technology like apps or educational software. At
the same time, “technology-enabled behavioral interventions” also seem to be par-
ticularly effective at solving problems of informational-asymmetries, accountability,
and enforcement of duties, while also being particularly cost-effective and prone to
scalability. The studies under “access to technology” did not show a pattern of rais-
ing learning, only students’ acquaintance with technology. However, interventions
that facilitate access to technology are a first and necessary step to implement other
EdTech solutions like educational software, especially in many remote and deprived
areas. Most importantly, there is a need for researchers and policy makers to move
away from a dogmatic adherence to one of the four areas, and to embrace the fact that
all four areas can act as mutually complementary in addressing deficiencies within
educational systems.
Another important lesson that emerged from the four thematic areas is the im-
portance for an EdTech intervention to be thoughtfully designed around a carefully
identified contextual issue. To illustrate this point, one can look at the way in which
Beg et al. (2019) identified clear contextual constraints, and then designed the inter-
vention around these. The constraint in their case was the unavailability of qualified
teachers and teacher absenteeism. They hypothesize about appropriate and scalable
technologicalapproachestoaddresstheseissueswithcontextuallygroundedtheories
of change that involve the provision of short videos with academic content in math
and science. This design then led to large and cost-effective gains in learning, and to
some extent increased teacher effort. Importantly for scalability considerations, this
EdTech program was implemented through the local government. This intervention
stands in sharp contrast to Angrist and Lavy (2002), or even the OLPC interventions,
which attempted to address a more nebulous issue of access to computers without a
clear theoretical, causal path between owning a computer and improved school per-
formance. In the extreme case of Angrist and Lavy (2002), a well-intentioned and
expensive intervention ended up even yielding negative results in learning.
190
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 37, no. 2 (2022)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table 1. Summary of EdTech Interventions in Developing Countries by Thematic Area
Access to technology
Technology-enabled behavioral
interventions
Improvements to instruction
Self-led learning
Intended policy
targets
Low penetration of technologies
capable of hosting educational
features; low familiarity with digital
skills.
Informational barriers; behavioral
inconsistencies; lack of
accountability; alignment of
incentives.
Gaps in teacher knowledge;
difficulties of recruiting teachers in
remote areas; scalability of student
and teacher training programs.
Reinforcement of material and
practice problems; addressing
student-specific gaps in skills;
adjusting the pace and level of
instruction.
Effectiveness
Very low for academic learning,
medium for increases in familiarity
with digital tools.
Low to medium for learning
outcomes.
Consistently medium to large effects
for learning outcomes.
Among the software evaluated,
consistently medium to large effects
for learning outcomes.
Cost-
effectiveness
Extremely low. Poor effectiveness
coupled with high marginal costs.
As a result, expensive to scale.
Very high, particularly due to the
very low marginal costs of most
interventions. Very high potential
for scalability.
High, as fixed costs of product
development tend to be higher than
marginal costs.
High, as interventions are often
implemented in community or
school level computer labs so the
same hardware/software can reach
many students.
Best uses
Increase familiarity with
technology; or as a platform to
implement other types of EdTech
interventions.
Improve enforcement of policies;
provide information at scale.
Deliver high-quality education to
areas where this is a serious
constraint.
Complement classroom instruction;
reinforce lessons; fill in content
gaps.
Potential pitfalls
and challenges
Leakage and misuse of equipment;
crowding out of time better spent in
other educational activities.
Interventions require particularly
deep contextual knowledge about
behaviors that can be shaped
through relatively low-touch
interventions.
A sudden change in technology
that does not directly address a
pressing problem may hinder
instruction and lead to negative
effects in learning.
Software needs to be developed for
more contexts, languages, and
subjects. Reliance on self-guidance
may benefit high achievers more;
increasing within-class inequality.
Examples of
interventions
One-laptop-per-child (OLPC)
(Barrera-Osorio and Linden 2009;
Cristia et al. 2017); provision of
handheld devices (Habyarimana
and Sabarwal 2018; Mensch and
Haberland 2018)
Keeping parents up to date on
student performance and
attendance via SMS (Berlinski et al.
2016); monitoring teacher
attendance through cameras linked
to pay incentives (Gaduh et al.
2020)
Broadcasting of live instruction
remotely (Johnston and Ksoll
2017); pre-recorded video and
audio lessons to supplement
classroom instruction (Beg et al.
2019; Näslund-Hadley et al. 2014)
Software (typically self-adaptive) to
practice language and math skills
(Muralidharan et al. 2019; Linden
2008; Carrillo et al. 2011; Araya
et al. 2019); Online classes (Chong
et al. 2020).
Rodriguez-Segura
191
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

The quality of implementation and take-up from relevant stakeholders also stand
as pivotal components to understanding the success or failure of an intervention, es-
pecially with limitations on state capacity. However, quality of implementation does
not seem to replace a well-designed program. In other words, while quality of imple-
mentation could make or break a project that may be indeed appropriate to address
certain issues if properly implemented, such as in Adelman et al. (2015), a successful
implementation and take-up does not guarantee gains in educational outcomes. As
an illustration of this point, Berlinski and Busso (2017) report high take-up of their
treatment, and no issues with implementation are reported. However, the interven-
tion also led to negative effects on learning, which was hampered by the inclusion of
technology into a pedagogical change. While an initial reaction to this major point
about quality of implementation may be to motivate implementers of the study to
exert exceptional effort and resources to ensure that the intervention goes precisely
as planned, the end goal for most of these interventions is to test whether they have
potential for scalability. In many cases, the difficulty of maintaining high implemen-
tation quality tends to get larger with the size of the intervention. Therefore, a lesson
that emerges from this review, and from other work like Niehaus and Muralidharan
(2016) for that matter, is to give preference to intervention designs with relatively few
touchpoints between the delivery of treatment and the target population, so that if
and when the intervention is scaled, it can adhere to similar implementation stan-
dards as the evaluation phase.
Relatedly, the question of scalability also emerges as an important issue when it
comes to EdTech interventions. For instance, an interesting feature for EdTech inter-
ventions is the interplay between fixed and marginal costs.17 Depending on the type
of intervention, there could be serious trade-offs between the two types of costs that
could significantly affect scalability and economies of scale in expanding treatment
to other individuals. Two opposite examples are the OLPC studies (Barrera-Osorio
and Linden 2009; Beuermann et al. 2015; Cristia et al. 2010, 2017; de Melo et al.
2014; Meza-Cordero 2017) versus the “Sesame Street” studies (Borzekowski 2018;
Borzekowski 2010; Borzekowski et al. 2019a; Borzekowski et al. 2019b). The na-
ture of OLPC policies is that the cost of adding an additional child is exactly the cost
of a laptop. There may be some economies of scale through lower prices when buy-
ing computers in bulk, but the marginal cost is still considerably higher than any
fixed costs per student associated with running the program. Contrarily, the cost of
“Sesame Street”-type interventions is mostly focused around the fixed-costs of devel-
oping, producing, and distributing the T.V. episodes. However, the marginal cost of
another student watching the show is effectively zero. Unsurprisingly, most of the
studies reviewed here lie somewhere in between these two extremes, and their posi-
tion along this spectrum also depends heavily on the area of the review. For instance,
interventions within the “access to technology” category tend to skew towards higher
marginal costs, and interventions within “improvements to instruction” tend to skew
192
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 37, no. 2 (2022)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

towards higher fixed costs. This distinction is crucial to welfare analyses of EdTech in-
terventions, as interventions with low marginal costs and positive effects, as small as
they may be, stand to achieve efficiency improvements by enrolling more children,
while interventions with high marginal costs must consider more carefully whether
the marginal benefit to the infra-marginal student will indeed justify the relatively
higher costs.
Another potential consideration for the scalability of EdTech products is the trade-
off between the economies of scale of product development, and the tailoring of a
product to the local context. In other words, the smaller the market an intervention
intends to target, the costlier the tailoring of the intervention would be. For instance,
an EdTech solution focusing on early language development in a country with many
regional languages would either need to develop a different version for each regional
language, or focus on the main national and/or colonial language, which may also
have equity implications. A similar pattern occurs across different grades: while most
early curricula in most countries focuses, in one way or the other, on the development
of foundational literacy and numeracy skills, the contents of curricula grow increas-
ingly different across countries with grade progression. Therefore, an app focusing on
early skills may have a larger potential market than one focusing on a niche curricu-
lar feature, such as pre-colonial Nigerian history, which may be present in Nigeria’s
curriculum but not Ghana’s.
Given the inherent limitations, costs, and barriers to entry that EdTech interven-
tions may face, it is also important to note that from the core set of studies, it is not
clear whether EdTech interventions always achieve higher learning gains and are al-
ways more cost-effective, compared to other non-EdTech interventions in develop-
ing countries. In this sense, the question that policy makers and researchers face
when evaluating an EdTech intervention should not be whether this technological
approach could address a problem in the educational system, but rather whether it
would be the most effective and cost-effective way to do so. Indeed, there are exam-
ples of non-EdTech interventions in developing countries that have been equally suc-
cessful at raising learning standards as the most promising EdTech solutions, such as
“Teach at the Right Level” (Banerjee et al. 2016) or the combination of other fruitful
approaches such as scripting and after-school remediation lessons (Eble et al. 2019).
Besides the cost and ease of implementation and scalability, the decision to imple-
ment an EdTech intervention versus an equally well-designed non-EdTech solution
should come down to whether the intervention could benefit from the comparative
advantages offered by EdTech, such as the potential for high levels of customization
of practice exercises or remote engagement.
Among the set of broader questions that remain on the frontier of EdTech research
are those involving “general equilibrium” effects after the rollout of an EdTech inter-
vention. Very little is known about the system-level, medium- and long-term effects
on teacher attitudes, effort, and behavior following an EdTech intervention. One can
Rodriguez-Segura
193
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

imagine a context where teachers quickly adapt the technology to their daily routine
and set of tools, as it becomes an integral part of education. Conversely, there could
also be a scenario in which the take-up of technology only happens during a brief
period of excitement or monitoring, and the use is then gradually discontinued. Sim-
ilarly, one can imagine teachers feeling more motivated about new technology lifting
some of their instructional burden and hence putting more effort into the time that
they actually teach, or on the contrary, teachers relying on EdTech as a substitute
for instruction to maintain or increase their absenteeism rates. Questions of this na-
ture can be asked at the school level and even at the system level, where it is unclear
whether EdTech can crowd out resources of other important educational inputs, or
will instead boost the effectiveness of other complementary investments. Similarly,
little is known about EdTech’s potential to increase inequality at a larger scale, if ef-
fective EdTech interventions are also not available for disadvantaged groups. While it
is too soon to point to tangible data (at least from developing countries), the school
closures induced by the COVID-19 pandemic are a stark example of how the avail-
ability of EdTech at home could have minimized learning losses heterogeneously for
different socioeconomic groups. Finally, the susceptibility of EdTech interventions to
political and investment cycles is an important, yet understudied topic.18 Conditional
on finding a set of interventions that raise educational outcomes in a specific context,
the continuity of these programs by future education leaders and policy makers is just
as crucial as the finding that the intervention is an effective one.
The breadth in the EdTech literature, in terms of type of intervention and context,
is greater than its current depth, both in terms of replication of studies in different
contexts, and multiple angles to similar research questions. As EdTech keeps growing
throughout different developing countries, and policy makers face more options to
address the particular challenges in their respective contexts, the body of knowledge
in various aspects of when, where, and for whom EdTech interventions work must
also grow. Addressing critical questions of scalability, external translation of results,
preparedness for EdTech interventions within and between countries, and the partic-
ular shortcomings of educational systems in developing countries where EdTech can
be most effective will be of paramount importance to keep up with an evidence-based
agenda in pursuit of improved educational and welfare outcomes for people in the
developing world.
Notes
University of Virginia, Charlottesville VA, 22903, Unites States. June, 2021
The author would like to thank Beth Schueler, Isaac Mbiti, Ben Castleman, Caroline Whitcomb, and
three anonymous reviewers for the guidance in the ideation, structuring, and writing of this paper. The
author also thanks Andy de Barros, Lee Crawfurd, Thomas de Hoop, Melissa Adelman, Moussa Blimpo,
Adrienne Lucas, Christopher Neilson, Elena Arias-Ortiz, Vincent Quan, and Radhika Bhula for their help
194
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 37, no. 2 (2022)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

facilitating papers, data, and resources. The active collection and addition of articles for this paper hap-
pened through September 2020. Please address all correspondence to dan.rodriguez@virginia.edu.
1. For example, the laptops in Beuermann et al. (2015).
2. For example, the tablets in Pitchford (2015).
3. For example, the use of SMS texts in Berlinski et al. (2016) or T.V. programming in Borzekowski
(2018).
4. For example, the after-school program evaluated in Böhmer et al. (2014).
5. There was no restriction on search date. 2002 is simply the year of the earliest paper found.
6. Given the many avenues in which EdTech solutions can be implemented, and the broad nature
of this review, it is impossible to establish an absolute threshold for the needs that households, schools,
or educational systems must have met before adopting an EdTech product. However, most EdTech tools
do require either access to connectivity features like electricity, internet, mobile coverage, a broadband
connection, and/or access to hardware such as computers, cellphones, or tablets. Clearly, the extent to
which these technologies are readily available in an area will heavily influence both the feasibility of
implementing an EdTech intervention, and the kind of EdTech interventions available for policy makers
to choose from.
7. World Bank Development Indicators: Access to electricity ( percent of population), 2018.
8. World Bank Development Indicators: Individuals using the Internet ( percent of population),
2018.
9. UNESCO Institute for Statistics: Proportion of schools with electricity and telephone communica-
tion facilities, 2012.
10. UNESCO Institute for Statistics: Proportion of educational institutions with Internet access, by
type, (primary and secondary) 2012.
11. Escueta et al. also use the “Access to technology” and “Technology-enabled behavioral inter-
ventions” categories. Their “Computer-assisted learning” was replaced for a broader “Self-led learning,”
which also included their “Online learning” category. Finally, there were enough interventions in the
“Improvements to instruction” category that did not neatly fit into the other categories, which also de-
served a separate category.
12. Accordingtotheauthorof thestudy,“Telesecundarias areatypeof junior secondaryschoolthat
delivers all lessons through television broadcasts in a classroom setting, with a single labelport teacher
per grade. The televised content follows the national curriculum and is complemented with learning
guides and in-classroom work and discussions.”
13. For instance, see Trucano (2010) for a high-level overview of radio instruction programs, and
Ho and Thukral (2009) for an overview of the evidence on the effectiveness of radio instruction.
14. For instance, see Huang et al. (2020) for a clear illustration of serious teacher recruitment issues
in Indonesia.
15. World Bank Development Indicators: Primary education, pupils.
16. Note that this is not a comprehensive list of potential features to be studied and/or included in
an EdTech product. Sampson et al. (2019) mentions other potential features which an EdTech product
could include, such as the inclusion of different components like “explanatory videos,” “practice exer-
cises,” “problem solutions,” “assessments,” “quizzes/stories,” “simulations,” and “flash cards.”
17. For an excellent review of the advantages and necessary conditions for the successful scalability
of interventions in developing countries, see Muralidharan and Niehaus (2017).
18. ForinformativecasestudiesonhowtheRepublicof Korea,Estonia,andUruguayhaveintegrated
ICT into their educational system at-scale, see Díaz et al. (2020).
Rodriguez-Segura
195
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

References
Banerjee, A., R. Banerji, J. Berry, E. Duflo, H. Kannan, S. Mukerji, M. Shotland, and M. Walton. 2017.
“From Proof of Concept to Scalable Policies: Challenges and Solutions, with an Application.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives 31(4): 73–102. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.31.4.73.
Castleman, B. L., and L. C. Page. 2015. “Summer Nudging: Can Personalized Text Messages and Peer
Mentor Outreach Increase College Going Among Low-Income High School Graduates?” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization 115: 144–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2014.12.008.
Crawfurd, L. 2020. “Why the COVID Crisis Is Not Edtech’s Moment in Africa.” Center for Global Develop-
ment (blog). https://www.cgdev.org/blog/why-covid-crisis-not-edtechs-moment-africa.
De Ree, J., K. Muralidharan, M. Pradhan, and H. Rogers. 2018. “Double for Nothing? Experimental Ev-
idence on an Unconditional Teacher Salary Increase in Indonesia.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
133 (2): 993–1039.
Díaz, M. B., M. Mercedes, C. Lee, A. Zucchetti, B. Olszewski, C. Cobo, L. Viik, M. Kyllönen, J. South, M.
Montaldo, and Y. Ramos. 2020. What Technology Can and Can’t Do for Education: A Comparison of 5
Stories of Success. Interamerican Development Bank. http://dx.doi.org/10.18235/0002401.
Doss, C., E. M. Fahle, S. Loeb, and B. N. York. 2018. “More Than Just a Nudge: Supporting Kinder-
garten Parents with Differentiated and Personalized Text-Messages.” Journal of Human Resources 54
(3): 567–603.
Duflo, E., P. Dupas, and M. Kremer. 2011. “Peer Effects, Teacher Incentives, and the Impact of Tracking:
Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya.” American Economic Review 101 (5): 1739–74.
Eble, A., C. Frost, M. Bah, J. Hsieh, C. Jayanty, T. Brady, P. Gawron, P. Boone, and D. Elbourne. 2019.
“How Much Can We Remedy Very Low Learning Levels in Rural Parts of Low-Income Coun-
tries? Impact and Generalizability of a Multi-Pronged Para-Teacher Intervention from a Cluster-
Randomized Trial in The Gambia.” Ed Working Paper: 19-157, Annenberg Institute at Brown Uni-
versity. https://doi.org/10.26300/3n1x-rh14.
Escueta, M., A. J. Nickow, P. Oreopoulos, and V. Quan. 2020. “Upgrading Education with Technology:
Insights from Experimental Research.” Journal of Economic Literature 58 (4): 897–996.
Evans, D. K., and A. Mendez Acosta. 2020. “Education in Africa: What Are We Learning?” Journal of
African Economies ejaa009. https://doi.org/10.1093/jae/ejaa009.
Evans,
D.,
and
M.
Ngatie.
2020.
“School
Uniforms,
Short-Run
Participation,
and
Long-
Run Outcomes: Evidence from Kenya.” World Bank Economic Review lhaa004, https://doi.
org/10.1093/wber/lhaa004.
Ganimian, A. J., and R. J. Murnane. 2016. “Improving Education in Developing Countries: Lessons From
Rigorous Impact Evaluations.” Review of Educational Research 86 (3): 719–55.
Glewwe, P., M. Kremer, and S. Moulin. 2009. “Many Children Left Behind? Textbooks and Test Scores in
Kenya.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (1): 112–35.
Ho, J., H. Thukral, and M. Laflin. 2009. “Tuned In To Student Success. Assessing the Impact of Interac-
tive Radio Instruction for the Hardest-to-Reach.” Journal of Education for International Development 4
(2): 34–51.
Huang, A. R., S. Revina, R. Fillaili, and Akhmadi. 2020. “The Struggle to Recruit Good
Teachers
in
Indonesia:
Institutional
and
Social
Dysfunctions.”
RISE
Working
Pa-
per
Series.
20/041.
https://rise.smeru.or.id/sites/default/files/publication/RISE_WP-
041_INDONESIA_HUANGetal_0.pdf.
Jensen, R. 2010. “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling *.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 125 (2): 515–48.
196
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 37, no. 2 (2022)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Kozma, R. B., and W. Surya Vota. 2014. “ICT in Developing Countries: Policies, Implementation, and Im-
pact.” In J. M. Spector, M. D. Merrill, J. Elen, and M. J. Bishop (eds.), Handbook of Research on Educational
Communications and Technology (pp. 885894). New York: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-
4614-3185-5_72.
Lavinas, L., and A. Veiga. 2013. “Desafios do modelo brasileiro de inclusão digital pela escola.” Cadernos
de Pesquisa 43 (149): 542–69.
Mbiti, I., K. Muralidharan, M. Romero, Y. Schipper, C. Manda, and R. Rajani. 2019a. “Inputs, Incentives,
and Complementarities in Education: Experimental Evidence from Tanzania.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 134 (3): 1627–73.
———. 2019b. “Replication Data for: ‘Inputs, Incentives, and Complementarities in Education: Experi-
mental Evidence from Tanzania’.” https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/AKVGQ7, Harvard Dataverse, V2.
Mbiti, I., M. Romero, and Y. Schipper. 2019c. “Designing effective teacher performance pay programs:
experimental evidence from Tanzania.” NBER Working Paper No. 25903.
McEwan, P. J. 2015. “Improving Learning in Primary Schools of Developing Countries: A Meta-Analysis
of Randomized Experiments.” Review of Educational Research 85 (3): 353–94.
Muralidharan, K., J. Das, A. Holla, and A. Mohpal. 2010. “The Fiscal Cost of Weak Governance: Evidence
from Teacher Absence in India.” Journal of Public Economics 145: 116–35.
Muralidharan, K., and P. Niehaus. 2017. “Experimentation at Scale.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 31
(4): 103–24.
Piper, B., and D. Evans. 2020. “Guiding Teachers Rather than Scripting Them.” Center for Global Devel-
opment (blog). https://www.cgdev.org/blog/guiding-teachers-rather-scripting-them.
Piper, B., Y. Sitabkhan, J. Mejía, and K. Betts. 2018. Effectiveness of Teachers’ Guides in the Global South:
Scripting, Learning Outcomes, and Classroom Utilization. RTI Press Publication No. OP-0053-1805. Re-
search Triangle Park, N.C.: RTI Press. https://doi.org/10.3768/rtipress.2018.op.0053.1805.
Pritchett, L., and A. Beatty. 2015. “Slow Down, you’re Going Too Fast: Matching Curricula to Student
Skill Levels.” International Journal of Educational Development 40: 276–88.
Rieble, S., A. Viteri, M. Vásquez, and E. Arias-Ortiz. 2020. “COVID-19 y la gran apuesta del
aprendizaje
desde
casa:
¿funcionará
para
todos?”
Interamerican
Development
Bank
(blog).
https://blogs.iadb.org/educacion/es/aprendizajedesdecasa/.
Sampson, R., D. Johnson, H. Barton, J. Ruchika, M. Seth, and M. Shotland. 2019. “Insights from Rapid
Evaluations of EdTech Products.” The EdTech Lab Series. https://centralsquarefoundation.org/wp-
content/uploads/EdTech%20Lab%20Report_November%202019.pdf.
SDI – Service Delivery Indicators. 2010-2014. “Education data [Data file].” https://www.
sdindicators.org/aboutus#where-are-we-now-.
Searle, B. 1975. The Nicaragua Radio Mathematics Project. Report. Washington, D.C.: Agency for Interna-
tional Development (Dept. of State). https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED112887.
Trucano, M. 2010. “Interactive Radio Instruction: A Successful Permanent Pilot Project?” World Bank
Blogs. https://blogs.worldbank.org/edutech/iri.
Core Studies
Abrami, P. C., C. A. Wade, L. Lysenko, J. Marsh, and A. Gioko. 2016. “Using Educational Technology to
Develop Early Literacy Skills in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Education and Information Technologies 21 (4):
945–64. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-014-9362–4.
Adelman, M., M. P. Blimpo, D. Evans, A. Simbou, and N. Yarrow. 2015. “Can Information Technol-
ogy Improve School Effectiveness in Haiti? Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Working Paper, World
Bank, Washington, DC.
Rodriguez-Segura
197
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Aker, J. C., and C. Ksoll. 2019. “Call Me Educated: Evidence from a Mobile Phone Experiment in Niger.”
Economics of Education Review 72: 239–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2019.05.001.
Angrist, J., and V. Lavy. 2002. “New Evidence on Classroom Computers and Pupil Learning.” Economic
Journal 112 (482): 735–65.
Angrist, N., P. Bergman, and M. Matsheng. 2021. “School’s Out: Experimental Evidence on Limiting
Learning Loss Using ‘low-tech’ in a Pandemic.” NBER Working Paper 28205.
Araya, R., E. Arias Ortiz, N. L. Bottan, and J. P. Cristia. 2019. Does Gamification in Education Work?: Experi-
mental Evidence from Chile. Inter-American Development Bank. https://doi.org/10.18235/0001777.
Bai, Y., D. Mo, L. Zhang, M. Boswell, and S. Rozelle. 2016. “The Impact of Integrating ICT with Teaching:
Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Rural Schools in China.” Computers & Education 96:
1–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2016.02.005.
Bando, R., F. Gallego, P. Gertler, and D. Romero Fonseca. 2017. “Books or Laptops? The Effect of Shifting
from Printed to Digital Delivery of Educational Content on Learning.” Economics of Education Review
61: 162–73. 10.1016/j.econedurev.2017.07.005.
Banerjee, A. V., S. Cole, E. Duflo, and L. Linden. 2007. “Remedying Education: Evidence from
Two Randomized Experiments in India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3): 1235–64.
https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.122.3.1235.
Barrera-Osorio, F., and L. Linden. 2009. “The Use and Misuse of Computers in Education: Evi-
dence from a Randomized Experiment in Colombia.” Policy Research Working Paper, WPS4836.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/346301468022433230/The-use-and-misuse-of-
computers-in-education-evidence-from-a-randomized-experiment-in-Colombia.
Beg, S., A. Lucas, W. Halim, and U. Saif. 2019. “Beyond the Basics: Improving Post-Primary Content De-
livery Through Classroom Technology.” Working Paper no, w25704, National Bureau of Economic
Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w25704.
Berkhout, E., M. Pradhan, Rahmawati, D. Suryadarma, and A. Swarnata. 2020. “From Cheating to
Learning: An Evaluation of Fraud Prevention on National Exams in Indonesia.” RISE Working Paper
Series. 20/046. https://doi.org/10.35489/BSG- RISEWP_2020/046.
Berlinski,
S.,
and
M.
Busso.
2017.
“Challenges
in
Educational
Reform:
An
Experiment
on
Active
Learning
in
Mathematics.”
Economics
Letters
156:
172–5.
https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.econlet.2017.05.007.
Berlinski, S., M. Busso, T. Dinkelman, and C. Martinez. 2016. “Reducing parent-school Information Gaps
and Improving Education Outcomes: Evidence from High Frequency Text Messaging in Chile.” Work-
ing Paper. https://www.povertyactionlab.org/sites/default/files/publications/726_%20Reducing-
Parent-School-information-gap_BBDM-Dec2016.pdf.
Bet, G., J. Cristia, and P. Ibarrarán. 2014. “The Effects of Shared School Technology Access
on Students’ Digital Skills in Peru.” IDB Working Paper Series No. IDB-WP—476. https://
publications.iadb.org/publications/english/document/The-Effects-of-Shared-School-Technology-
Access-on-Students-Digital-Skills-in-Peru.pdf.
Bettinger, E., E. Kardanova, R. Fairlie, P. Loyalka, A. Kapuza, and A. Zakharov. 2020. “Does EdTech Sub-
stitute for Traditional Learning? Experimental Estimates of the Educational Production Function.”
Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR), Working Paper No. 20–010.
Beuermann, D. W., J. Cristia, S. Cueto, O. Malamud, and Y. Cruz-Aguayo. 2015. “One Laptop Per Child
At Home: Short-Term Impacts from a Randomized Experiment in Peru.” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 7 (2): 53–80. https://doi.org/10.1257/app.20130267.
Bianchi, N., Y. Lu, and H. Song. 2019. “The Effect of Computer-Assisted Learning on Stu-
dents’
Long-Term
Development.”
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3309169
or
http://dx.doi.
org/10.2139/ssrn.3309169.
198
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 37, no. 2 (2022)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Blimpo, M. P., O. Gajigo, S. Owusu, R. Tomita, and Y. Xu. 2020. “Technology in the Classroom and Learn-
ing in Secondary Schools.” Unpublished Manuscript.
Böhmer, B., J. Burns, and L. Crowley. 2014. “Testing Numeric: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled
Trial of a Computer-based Mathematics Intervention in Cape Town High Schools.” University of Cape
Town.
Borzekowski, D. L. G. 2018. “A Quasi-experiment Examining the Impact of
Educational
Cartoons on Tanzanian Children.” Journal of
Applied Developmental Psychology 54: 53–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appdev.2017.11.007.
Borzekowski, D. L. G., and H. K. Henry. 2011. “The Impact of Jalan Sesama on the Educational and
Healthy Development of Indonesian Preschool Children: An Experimental Study.” International Jour-
nal of Behavioral Development 35 (2): 169–79. https://doi.org/10.1177/0165025410380983.
Borzekowski, D. L. G., A. L. Lando, S. H. Olsen, and L. Giffen. 2019a. “The Impact of an Educational
Media Intervention to Support Children’s Early Learning in Rwanda.” International Journal of Early
Childhood 51 (1): 109–26. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13158-019-00237–4.
Borzekowski, D. L. G., D. Singpurwalla, D. Mehrotra, and D. Howard. 2019. “The Impact of Galli
Galli Sim Sim on Indian Preschoolers.” Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 64: 101054.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appdev.2019.101054.
Brown, F., A. Farag, F. Hussein, L. Miller, K. Radford, A. A. Abbadi, K. Neijenhuijs, E. Oprins, T. De Hoop,
J. Turner, A. Jetten, and M. Jordans. (Forthcoming). “Can’t Wait to Learn: A quasi-experimental Eval-
uation of a Digital game-based Learning Programme for Out of School Children in Sudan.” Journal
of Development Effectiveness.
Büchel, K., M. Jakob, C. Kühnhanss, D. Steffen, and A. Brunetti. 2020. “The Relative Effectiveness of
Teachers and Learning Software: Evidence from a Field Experiment in El Salvador.” University of
Bern Social Sciences Working Paper No. 36.
Cardim, J., T. Molina Millán, and P. Vicente. 2019. “Technology-Aided Instruction in Pri-
mary
Education:
Experimental
Evidence
from
Angola.”
Working
Paper.
https://custom.
cvent.com/4E741122FD8B4A1B97E483EC8BB51CC4/files/Event/ca 4fa1845a194f7fa5fed5711
b3c0a8f/ce84c22d75cd42748fd5feca3991f2a8.pdf.
Carrillo, P. E., M. Onofa, and J. Ponce. 2011. “Information Technology and Student Achievement: Evi-
dence from a Randomized Experiment in Ecuador.” SSRN Electronic Journal. IDB Working Paper No.
78. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1818756.
Chong, A., M. Gonzalez-Navarro, D. Karlan, and M. Valdivia. 2020. “Do Information Technologies Im-
prove Teenagers’ Sexual Education? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Colombia.” The World
Bank Economic Review 34 (2): 371–92. https://doi.org/10.1093/wber/lhy031.
Cilliers, J., B. Fleisch, J. Kotze, N. Mohohlwane, T. Thulare, and S. Taylor. 2020. “Can Vir-
tual Replace In-person Coaching? Experimental Evidence on Teacher Professional Devel-
opment and Student Learning in South Africa.” Research on Improving Systems of Ed-
ucation
(RISE).
https://www.riseprogramme.org/sites/www.riseprogramme.org/files/inline-
files/Virtual%20vs%20InPerson%20Coaching%20Working%20Paper.pdf.
Cristia, J., A. Czerwonko, and P. Garofalo. 2010. “Does ICT Increate Years of Education? Evidence from
Peru.” Inter-American Development Bank Working Paper: OVE/WP-01/10.
Cristia, J., P. Ibarrarán, S. Cueto, A. Santiago, and E. Severín. 2017. “Technology and Child Development:
Evidence from the One Laptop Per Child Program.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 9
(3): 295–320. https://doi.org/10.1257/app.20150385.
De Hoop, T., A. Brudevold-Newman, H. Ring, H. Riyadh, J. Turner, K. Hunt, V. Rothbard, K. Radford,
Z. Twissi, M. J. D. Jordans, and F. Brown. 2020. “Can Comprehensive Gaming-based Technology in
Formal Education Programs Improve Learning and Psychosocial Outcomes? Evidence from a quasi-
experimental Study in Jordan.” (Work in Progress).
Rodriguez-Segura
199
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

de
Hoop,
T.,
H.
Ring,
G.
Siwach,
P.
Dias,
G.
Tembo,
V.
Rothbard,
and
A.
Toungui.
2020.
“Impact
of
e-Learning
Technology
and
Activity-Based
Learning
on
Learn-
ing
Outcomes:
Experimental
Evidence
from
Community
Schools
in
Rural
Zambia.”
https://academic.oup.com/jae/article/30/1/13/5999001.
de Melo, G., A. Machado, and A. Miranda. 2014. “The Impact of a One Laptop Per Child Program on
Learning: Evidence from Uruguay.” IZA, Discussion Paper No. 8489.
Derksen, L., C. Leclerc, and P. C. Souza. 2020. “Searching for Answers: The Impact of Stu-
dent Access to Wikipedia.” Working Paper. https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/economics/research/
centres/cage/manage/publication s/450–2019_souza.pdf.
Duflo, E., R. Hanna, and S. P. Ryan. 2012. “Incentives Work: Getting Teachers to Come to School.” Amer-
ican Economic Review 102 (4): 1241–78. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.102.4.1241.
Dustan, A., S. Maldonado, and J. M. Hernandez-Agramonte. 2019. “Motivating Bureaucrats with Non-
monetary Incentives when State Capacity is Weak: Evidence from Large-scale Field Experiments in
Peru.” Working paper.
EdSurge. 2019. “Chinese Edtech sees $1.86B in Q1 2019, Bucking Plummeting Venture Trend.” (May
27, 2019).
Freeman, B., and R. Hawkins. 2017. “Evoke. Developing Skills in Youth to Solve the World’s Most Com-
plex Problems: Randomized Impact Evaluation Findings.” World Bank Education, Technology & In-
novation: SABER-ICT Technical Paper Series No. 19.
Frost & Sullivan. 2017. “Growth Opportunities in the Education Technology Market, Forecast to 2022.”
(December 15, 2017).
Gaduh, A., M. Pradhan, J. Priebe, and D. Susanti. 2020. “Scores, Camera, Action? Incen-
tivizing Teachers in Remote Areas.” Research on Improving Systems of Education (RISE).
https://doi.org/10.35489/BSG-RISE-WP_2020/035.
Gambari, A. I., A. T. Shittu, F. O. Daramola, and M. James. 2016. “Effects of Video-based Cooperative,
Competitive and Individualized Instructional Strategies on the Performance of Senior Secondary
Schools Students in Geometry.” Malaysian Online Journal of Educational Sciences 4 (4): 31–47.
Habyarimana, J., and W. Jack. 2018. “High Hopes: Experimental Evidence on Saving and the Transition
to High School in Kenya.” Georgetown University Initiative on Innovation, Development and Evalu-
ation Working Paper Series No. 4.
Habyarimana, J., and S. Sabarwal. 2018. “Re-Kindling Learning: Ereaders in Lagos.” Pol-
icy Research Working Paper; No. 8665. World Bank, Washington, DC. © World Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/30987.
He,
F.,
L.
Linden,
and
M.
MacLeod.
2008.
“How
to
Teach
English
in
India:
Testing
the
Relative
Productivity
of
Instruction
Methods
Within
the
Abstract:
Pratham
En-
glish
Language
Education
Program.”
Working
Paper.
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/
54de/5782f2c61a6fe8cb261c1e5e05904694d6b1.pdf.
Hirshleifer, S. R. 2016. “Incentives for Effort of Outputs? A Field Experiment to Improve Student Perfor-
mance.” Working Papers 201701, University of California at Riverside, Department of Economics.
Ito, H., K. Kasai, and M. Nakamuro. 2019. “Does Computer-Aided Instruction Improve Children’s Cog-
nitive and Non-Cognitive Skills? Evidence from Cambodia.” Discussion Papers 19040, Research In-
stitute of Economy, Trade and Industry (RIETI). https://ideas.repec.org/p/eti/dpaper/19040.html.
Jere-Folotiya, J., T. Chansa-Kabali, J. C. Munachaka, F. Sampa, C. Yalukanda, J. Westerholm, R. Serpell,
and H. Lyytinen. 2014. “The Effect of Using a Mobile Literacy Game to Improve Literacy Levels of
Grade One Students in Zambian Schools.” Education Technology Research and Development 62: 417–
36. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-014-9342–9.
200
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 37, no. 2 (2022)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

John, I. E., N.-A. Udofia, N. A. Udoh, and M. A. Anagbogu. 2016. “Development of Ecareer Guidance
Programme for Secondary Schools in Akwa Ibom State.” Educational Media International 53 (4): 298–
312. https://doi.org/10.1080/09523987.2016.1254886".
Johnston, J., and C. Ksoll. 2017. “Effectiveness of Interactive Satellite-Transmitted Instruction: Exper-
imental Evidence from Ghanaian Primary Schools.” Working Paper 17–08. CEPA Working Papers.
Stanford, CA: Stanford Center for Education Policy Analysis. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED579066.
Kho, K., L. Lakdawala, and E. Nakasone. 2018. “Impact of Internet Access on Student Learning in Pe-
ruvian Schools.” https://mwiedc.aae.wisc.edu/schedule/papers/283/.
Kotze, J., B. Fleisch, and S. Taylor. 2019. “Alternative Forms of Early Grade Instructional Coaching:
Emerging Evidence from Field Experiments in South Africa.” International Journal of Educational De-
velopment 66: 203–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedudev.2018.09.004.
Lai, F., R. Luo, L. Zhang, X. Huang, and S. Rozelle. 2015. “Does Computer-assisted Learning Improve
Learning Outcomes? Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Migrant Schools in Beijing.” Eco-
nomics of Education Review 47: 34–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2015.03.005.
Lai, F., L. Zhang, Y. Bai, C. Liu, Y. Shi, F. Chang, and S. Rozelle. 2016. “More is Not Al-
ways Better: Evidence from a Randomised Experiment of
computer-assisted Learning in
Rural Minority Schools in Qinghai.” Journal of
Development Effectiveness 8 (4): 449–72.
https://doi.org/10.1080/19439342.2016.1220412.
Lai, F., L. Zhang, X. Hu, Q. Qu, Y. Shi, Y. Qiao, M. Boswell, and S. Rozelle. 2013. “Com-
puter Assisted Learning As Extracurricular Tutor? Evidence from a Randomised Experiment
in Rural Boarding Schools in Shaanxi.” Journal of Development Effectiveness 5 (2): 208–31.
https://doi.org/10.1080/19439342.2013.780089.
Lehrer, K., M. Mawoyo, and S. Mbaye. 2019. “The Impacts of
Interactive Smartboards
on Learning Achievement in Senegalese Primary Schools (3ie Grantee Final Report).”
https://developmentevidence.3ieimpact.org/search-result-details/impact-evaluationrepository/
the-impacts-of-interactive-smartboards-on-learning-achievement-insenegalese-primary-
schools/7721.
Linden, L. 2008. “Complement or Substitute? The Effect of Technology on Student Achieve-
ment in India.” Working Paper (Numbered Series), 44863. http://documents.worldbank.
org/curated/en/804371468034237060/Complement-or-substitute-The-effect-of-technology-
on-student-achievement-in-India.
Lysenko, L., P. C. Abrami, C. A. Wade, J. P. Marsh, M. WaGioko, and E. Kiforo. 2019. “Pro-
moting
Young
Kenyans’
Growth
in
Literacy
with
Educational
Technology:
A
Tale
of
Two Years of
Implementation.” International Journal of
Educational Research 95: 176–89.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2019.02.013.
Ma, Y., R. Fairlie, P. Loyalka, and S. Rozelle. 2020. “Isolating the ‘Tech’ from EdTech: Experimental Ev-
idence on Computer Assisted Learning in China.” Working Paper no. w26953, National Bureau of
Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w26953.
Malamud, O., and C. Pop-Eleches. 2011. “Home Computer Use and the Development of Human Capital.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126: 987–1027.
Malamud, O., S. Cueto, J. Cristia, and D. W. Beuermann. 2019. “Do Children Benefit from Inter-
net Access? Experimental Evidence from Peru.” Journal of Development Economics 138: 41–56.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdeveco.2018.11.005.
Mensch, B., and N. Haberland. 2018. “GirlsRead! Zambia DREAMS Innovation.” ISRCTN.
https://www.popcouncil.org/uploads/pdfs/2018PGY_GirlsRead_Brief.pdf.
Meza-Cordero, J. A. 2017. “Learn to Play and Play to Learn: Evaluation of the One Laptop Per Child
Program in Costa Rica: Learn to Play and Play to Learn.” Journal of International Development 29 (1):
3–31. https://doi.org/10.1002/jid.3267.
Rodriguez-Segura
201
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Mo, D., J. Swinnen, L. Zhang, H. Yi, Q. Qu, M. Boswell, and S. Rozelle. 2013. “Can One-to-One Computing
Narrow the Digital Divide and the Educational Gap in China? The Case of Beijing Migrant Schools.”
World Development 46: 14–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2012.12.019.
Mo, D., L. Zhang, R. Luo, Q. Qu, W. Huang, J. Wang, Y. Qiao, M. Boswell, and S. Rozelle. 2014. “In-
tegrating Computer-assisted Learning Into a Regular Curriculum: Evidence from a Randomised
Experiment in Rural Schools in Shaanxi.” Journal of Development Effectiveness 6 (3): 300–23.
https://doi.org/10.1080/19439342.2014.911770.
Mo, D., L. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Huang, Y. Shi, M. Boswell, and S. Rozelle. 2014. “The Persistence of Gains
in Learning from Computer Assisted Learning (CAL): Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Ru-
ral Schools in Shaanxi Province in China.” Unpublished Manuscript. Stanford, CA: Rural Education
Action Program (REAP).
Muralidharan, K., A. Singh, and A. J. Ganimian. 2019. “Disrupting Education? Experimental Evi-
dence on Technology-Aided Instruction in India.” American Economic Review 109 (4): 1426–60.
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20171112.
Naik, G., C. Chitre, M. Bhalla, and J. Rajan. 2020. “Impact of Use of Technology on Student Learn-
ing Outcomes: Evidence from a large-scale Experiment in India.” World Development 127: 104736.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2019.104736.
Näslund-Hadley, E., S. Parker, and J. M. Hernandez-Agramonte. 2014. “Fostering Early Math Compre-
hension: Experimental Evidence from Paraguay.” Global Education Review 1 (4): 135–54. https://
eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ1055163.
Navarro-Sola, L. 2019. “Secondary School Expansion Through Televised Lessons: The La-
bor
Market
Returns
of
the
Mexican
Telesecundaria.”
Working
Paper.
https://laianaso.
github.io/laianavarrosola.com/Navarro-Sola_JMP.pdf.
Neilson, C., J. Berry, L. Coffman, and D. Morales. 2014. “Learning the Value of Education in the Do-
minican Republic.” Policy Report: Milestone 13. The Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab, Latin
America & the Caribbean.
Neilson, C., F. Gallegos, and O. Molina. 2018. “Decidiendo Para Un Futuro Mejor: Informando Sobre Los
Retornos Monetarios y Sociales De La Educación.” Policy Report: Evidencias MineduLAB No. 06.
Piper, B., S. S. Zuilkowski, D. Kwayumba, and C. Strigel. 2016. “Does Technology Improve Read-
ing Outcomes? Comparing the Effectiveness and Cost-effectiveness of ICT Interventions for
Early Grade Reading in Kenya.” International Journal of Educational Development 49: 204–2014.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedudev.2016.03.006.
Pitchford,
N.
J.
2015.
“Development
of
Early
Mathematical
Skills
with
a
Tablet
In-
tervention:
A
Randomized
Control
Trial
in
Malawi.”
Frontiers
in
Psychology,
6.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00485.
Pitchford, N. J., A. Chigeda, and P. J. Hubber. 2019. “Interactive Apps Prevent Gender Discrepancies
in early-grade Mathematics in a low-income Country in sub-Saharan Africa.” Developmental Science
Special Issue Article. DOI: 10.1111/desc.12864.
Riley, E. 2017. “Role Models in Movies: The Impact of Queen of Katwe on Students’ Educational Attain-
ment.” CSAE Working Paper Series 2017–13, Centre for the Study of African Economies, University
of Oxford.
Rosas, R., M. Nussbaum, P. Cumsille, V. Marianov, M. Correa, P. Flores, V. Grau, F. Lagos, X. López, V.
López, P. Rodriguez, and M. Salinas. 2003. “Beyond Nintendo: Design and Assessment of Educa-
tional Video Games for First and Second Grade Students.” Computers & Education 40 (1): 71–94.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-1315(02)00099–4.
Seo, H. K. 2017. “Do School Electrification and Provision of Digital Media Deliver Educa-
tional Benefits? First-Year Evidence from 164 Tanzanian Secondary Schools.” Working
Paper
E-40308-TZA-2.
London:
International
Growth
Centre.
https://www.theigc.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/10/IGC_Final-report_cover2.pdf.
202
The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 37, no. 2 (2022)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Vakis, R., and G. Farfan. 2018. “Envío De Mensajes De Texto Para Incrementar La Motivación y Satis-
facción Docente.” Policy Report: Evidencias MineduLAB No. 04.
Wennersten,M.,Z.B.Quraishy,andM.Velamuri.2015.“ImprovingStudentLearningViaMobilePhone
Video Content: Evidence from the BridgeIT India Project.” International Review of Education 61 (4):
503–28. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11159-015-9504-y.
Wolf, S., J. L. Aber, J. R. Behrman, and E. Tsinigo. 2019. “Experimental Impacts of the ‘Qual-
ity Preschool for Ghana’ Interventions on Teacher Professional Well-being, Classroom Quality,
and Children’s School Readiness.” Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness 12 (1): 10–37.
https://doi.org/10.1080/19345747.2018.1517199.
Yanguas,
M.
L.
2020.
“Technology
and
Educational
Choices:
Evidence
from
a
One-
laptop-per-child
Program.”
Economics
of
Education
Review
76:
101984.
https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2020.101984.
Rodriguez-Segura
203
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Supplementary Online Appendix
EdTech in Developing Countries: A Review of the Evidence
Daniel Rodriguez-Segura
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

S1. Methodology
The current paper is conceived as a comprehensive review. As such, all papers that
met the specified inclusion criteria were included. As a methodological choice, no
meta-regressions are presented in the full review, due to the vast diversity in the type
of interventions, contexts, and outcomes of interests. Given the relatively low num-
ber of studies within each category, and further variation in the types of treatment
within each category, meta-coefficients may yield overly-averaged meta-parameters
that could hide policy-relevant heterogeneity. This methodological choice also follows
Escueta et al. (2020). Instead, the current review presents a mostly qualitative de-
scription of the trends in the existing evidence within each of the four categories,
along with summary online tables for all papers within the set of core studies.
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
The primary aim of this project is to understand the broad patterns in the existing
evidence of the effectiveness of technology as a policy tool towards improved edu-
cational outcomes in developing settings. As part of the review, 81 different studies
were identified, which I refer to as the “core studies.” The scope of this review, and
hence the inclusion of the 81 papers into the group of core studies studying EdTech
in developing countries, was determined through four main inclusion parameters.
These parameters were (a) the quality of the evidence; (b) the stage in the publication
pipeline; (c) the context where the study was conducted; and (d) the inclusion of at
least one treatment branch with a technological component that meets the definition
of EdTech provided in the introduction.
a. Quality of evidence
While a vast number of policy reports, and rigorous descriptive and theoreti-
cal studies explore EdTech (see Rubagiza et al. 2011; Henessy et al. 2010; Tru-
cano 2015, 2016a, 2016b; Chinn and Fairlie 2010; Bulman and Fairlie 2016),
this review focuses on studies with causal identification strategies, which were
evaluations of the effectiveness of a technological feature in education. In prac-
tice, this meant focusing on papers which reported using experimental meth-
ods (RCTs), or quasi-experimental methods, including propensity-score matching.
Within these parameters, all papers were included, regardless of the quality of the
actual methodological implementation or publication outlet quality. Table S1.1
below outlines the prevalence of studies in the set of 81 core papers, where the
most salient feature is that three in four studies are randomized controlled trials.
b. Publication stage
The second feature used to filter studies is the publication stage. Following Escueta
et al. (2020), the scope of the current search is to be as inclusive as possible of all
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.1. Number of Studies in This Review by Main Methodological Tool
Empirical methodology
Number of studies
RCT
61
Difference-in-differences (DiD)/Trend-break
14
Propensity-score matching (PSM)
4
RD
1
IV
1
Total
81
Table S1.2. Number of Studies in This Review by Stage in the Publication Pipeline
Publication stage
Number of studies
Published paper
38
Working paper
35
Policy report
6
Unpublished manuscript
2
Total
81
existing evidence, regardless of its place along the publication pipeline. This is also
the strategy that Escueta et al. (2020) follows to deal with “file drawer bias,” or
the tendency for studies with positive or negative results to be published in peer-
reviewed journal more often than studies with null results.1 In sum, this approach
means that the current search includes published papers (47 percent) and work-
ing papers (43 percent), but also policy reports which do not currently have a full
paper and unpublished manuscripts which were referenced by other documents
but which were not publicly available. For the unpublished manuscripts and policy
reports (10 percent of all core studies), the authors of the studies were contacted,
and in all cases the authors gracefully agreed to share the studies to be included
in the current review.2 Finally, the breakdown of the core studies by their stage in
the publication pipeline is shown below.
c. Context
Developing countries are at the core of this review. Therefore, the third criteria
for inclusion was that all studies needed to be set in developing countries. While
the definition of what constitutes a developing country may vary, this review was
as inclusive of studies as possible in terms of context. Therefore, while countries
like Zambia or Colombia are indisputably included under any definition of “devel-
oping country,” countries like the Russian Federation, Chile, and Israel, may not
1. For a striking example of this, see DellaVigna and Linos (2020). This paper shows how published papers on applications of
“nudge theory” are on average more effective than all interventions implemented by “nudge units,” whether they are published or
not.
2. This review does not include projects which have not concluded, or for which not even preliminary results are publicly avail-
able, as promising as these may be. For a non-exhaustive glance at projects involving EdTech in developing countries which were not
included in this review because of this reason, please see Table S1.1 in the appendix.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.3. Number of Studies in this Review by Country Where the Study Took Place
Country
Number of studies
China, India, Peru
27 (9 each)
Kenya
4
Chile, Colombia, Indonesia, Malawi, Nigeria, South Africa, Zambia
21 (3 each)
Costa Rica, Ghana, Tanzania, Uruguay
8 (2 each)
Angola, Botswana, Cambodia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, The Gambia, Haiti, Honduras, Israel, Jordan, Mexico, Niger,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sudan, Uganda
21 (1 each)
Total
81
Table S1.4. Number of Studies by the Area of Classification Within This Review
Publication stage
Number of studies
Access to technology
22
Technology-enabled behavioral interventions
12
Improvements to instruction
20
Self-led learning
27
Total
81
always be. The presence of these countries follows a more traditional and inclusive
classification of countries for the sake of widening the reach of this review. Simi-
larly, the inclusion of these countries also follows the classification made by other
studies. For instance, the inclusion of Angrist and Lavy (2002) and Malamud and
Pop-Eleches (2011) in Israel and Romania respectively, follows the choice made
in Muralidharan et al. (2019), while the inclusion of the Bettinger et al. (2020)
study in Russia follows the authors’ own classification of Russia as a developing
country. The breakdown of studies by country is displayed in table S1.3.
d. Technology
The final filtering criterion was that all studies needed to have a major component
evaluating an application of technology with the goal of improving educational
outcomes. Within these parameters, the search was cast as widely as possible. In
other words, the focus of the study could have been a major technological inter-
vention, such as the livestreamed instruction in Johnston and Ksoll (2017), but
it could have also been a complement to a treatment branch such as the cam-
eras and incentivized payments for teachers in Gaduh et al. (2020), or it could
have also been just another experimental arm besides other non-tech arms such
as the interactive boards and computer labs in Berlinski and Busso (2017). To
understand the extent of the technological component within each study, Online
tables S1.1–S1.4 contain information on the specific intervention in each paper,
and the kind of technology used.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.5. Summary of All Studies Included Within the “Access to Technology” Category
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Angrist and
Lavy (2002)
Program “Tomorrow-98”.
Target student-computer
ratio of 10:1 in all schools.
Additional teacher training
to integrate computers to
instruction. Program
assignment at the
school-level.
Israel
Grades 4 and 8. 122
schools, targeted at
elementary and
middle schools
throughout Israel.
4,779 4th
graders, 3,196
8th graders
Grade 4: −0.4 to
−0.3 SD in Math,
no effects in
Hebrew. No effects
in grade 8 across
most models.
USD 3000 per
computer, with
40 computers
per school.
Bando et al.
(2017)
Replacement of traditional
textbooks with laptops.
Randomization at
school-level.
Honduras
Grades 3 and 6. 271
elementary schools
throughout the
country.
9,600
No effects.
Net cost of
USD 48 per
student, per
year.
Barrera-Osorio
and Linden
(2009)
Program “Computadores
para Educar”. 15 computers
per school to support
children’s language.
20-month long training for
teachers. Randomization at
school-level.
Colombia
Grades 3–9, 97
public schools with
80 or more
students. Six school
districts.
5,201
No effects.
Not specified.
Bet et al.
(2014)
Propensity score matching
groups with similar
observable educational
inputs but different intensity
in computer access.
Peru
Grade 9, 202
schools.
4,897
No effects in math
or language, 0.3
SD in digital skills.
Not specified.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.5. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade
and outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Beuermann
et al. (2015)
Program “One Laptop per Child”. Four laptops,
one per student, randomly distributed in each
class for use at home. Each computer included
applications such as educational games,
programming environments, and an
encyclopedia. Seven weekly training sessions.
Randomization at the student-level within
classes in treatment schools.
Peru
Grade 2, 28
schools, Public
schools in
Lima.
2,734
No effects on
achievement level.
Increased computer
proficiency in treated
students.
USD 188
per laptop.
Cardim et al.
(2019)
Evaluation of “ProFuturo” intervention. The
program includes the distribution of suitcases
with tablets, a computer for the teacher and a
projector. Randomization at the school-level.
Angola
Grades 4–6.
42 Catholic
schools in
Luanda.
2,460
No effects in learning,
increased familiarity
with technology.
Not
specified.
Cristia et al.
(2010)
ICT regional package including the lay-out of
the electrical infrastructure, 10 computers and
the installation of a network. These schools
entered the Huascaran program and hence,
they were assigned an innovation room
coordinator, training and standard software.
Additionally, the provision of internet access to
these schools was prioritized.
Peru
Grades 7–11
(Grades 1–5
secondary
school), 350
secondary
schools.
18,049
No effects.
Not
specified.
Cristia et al.
(2017)
Program: “One Laptop per Child”. Increased
ratio of computers per student from 0.12 to
1.18 in treatment schools. 40-hour teacher
training on how to use computers for
pedagogical purposes. Randomization at
school-level.
Peru
318 schools, 8
rural areas.
2,609
No effects.
USD 200
per laptop.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.5. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
de Melo et al.
(2014)
Program: “Plan Ceibal”. One computer per
pupil, with data detailing time of delivery of
computer to individual, therefore allowing to
use a continuous treatment variable (days of
exposure). Leveraging different delivery dates,
researchers use variation in delivery date across
individuals within same school with
fixed-effects at individual and school-level.
Uruguay
Grades 3–6, 90
primary schools,
nationally.
2,057
No effects in math and
reading.
USD 180 per laptop.
Habyarimana
and Jack (2018)
A mobile money platform operated a “lock
savings account”, especially targeted at parents
about to incur high educational costs.
Kenya
Parents of children
half way into grade
7 (final year of
primary). Parents
from 337 primary
schools in three
counties.
4,020
Higher secondary school
enrollment by 5–6 p.p. (ITT)
or 18–24 p.p. (TOT). Total
financial savings increased
between three and four
times. No effects on test
scores.
Not specified, although
the lock savings account
earns a bonus 1% on top
of the 2–5% APR
(forfeited if savings are
withdrawn beforehand).
Habyarimana
and Sabarwal
(2018)
Provision of eReaders. Testing the marginal
effects of eReaders with instructional material
from the pure effect of endowing the student
with an eReader. Four experimental groups: a
pure control group, a group that only received
an eReader with only non-curriculum reading
material, a group that received an eReader with
non-curriculum material and curriculum
textbooks, and a fourth group with all of these
previous features, plus supplementary
curriculum-relevant material. Randomization
performed at the student-level.
Nigeria
Grade 8. Lagos;
students came from
214 schools.
497
Overall no significant effects
of eReader. Students that
received eReaders with
curriculum materials and
no access to textbooks has
large, imprecise effects.
eReaders without
curriculum material led to a
decline in in overall reading
and math.
Cost of eReader is
USD 80.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.5. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Kho et al. (2018)
Impact evaluation of internet access on student
performance in the universe of public primary
schools in Peru that initially acquired internet
between 2007 and 2014. Leverages variation in
cohorts impacted, and timing of rollout to
schools.
Peru
Grade 2 provides test
scores, but policy
affected Grades 1–6.
5,903 public primary
schools.
218,883
Initial math improvements
of 0.042–0.076 SD,
growing at a rate of 0.047
SD per year, reaching 0.29
SD 5 years after installation.
Not specified.
Malamud and
Pop-Eleches
(2011)
Program: “Euro 200 Program”. USD 300
Voucher only valid to buy a home computer.
Educational software needed to be installed
separately, not always installed. Teacher
training, 530 multimedia lessons on the use of
computers for educational training.
Romania
Grades 1–12, Between
25,051 and 35,484
families received
vouchers of program
yearly between 2004
and 2008.
3,354
−0.44 SD math GPA, −0.56
SD in Romanian, −0.63 SD
in English, higher scores in
computer skills test by about
0.33 SD.
USD 300 per
voucher plus
management cost
(not specified).
Malamud et al.
(2019)
Three experimental arms: students that received
computers with access to high-speed internet,
students that received computers without
access to high-speed internet, and a pure
control group. Lotteries to give away four
laptops within each class. Computers had
standard software and some educational games.
Randomization at student-level within classes
in treatment schools.
Peru
Grades 3–5, 14
low-achieving public
primary schools.
2,126
No effects in learning,
cognitive and noncognitive
skills. Free internet access
led to improved computer
and internet proficiency.
Not specified.
Mensch and
Haberland
(2018)
Program: GirlsRead! Three experimental
branches: a pure control branch, a second
branch with safe spaces for girls where mentors
facilitate an empowerment-based life-skills
curriculum and all the activities of the second
branch, plus e-readers that girls keep for the
duration of the program with approximately
100 books of varying reading levels primarily
written by African authors. Randomization at
school-level.
Zambia
Grade 6. 36 schools in
three districts.
1,299
Reading scores 4.6 p.p.
higher in e-reader arm.
Three quarter of girls
attended all community
sessions. Only 2.4% of all
e-readers were lost, stolen,
or broken.
Not specified.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.5. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Meza-Cordero
(2017)
Impact evaluation of “One-Laptop-per-Child”
intervention, using a difference-in-differences
estimation strategy, as treatment was not
randomly assigned.
Costa Rica
Grades 1–6. 34 schools.
3,174
Increase in time using a
computer (to browse
internet, do homework,
read, and play), decrease of
time spent doing homework
and outdoor activities; no
effects on learning.
USD 225 per student
accounting for all
costs, USD 209 per
computer.
Mo et al. (2013)
Evaluation of One Laptop per Child policy.
Randomization at individual-level.
China
Grade 3. 13 schools of
migrant children in
Beijing.
300
Effects in computer skills of
0.32 SD, 0.17 SD in math,
no effects on language.
Not specified.
Navarro-Sola
(2019)
Program: Expansion of Mexican
Telesecundaria, or schools using televised
lessons. The study exploits the staggered
rollout of the policy from 1968 to present.
Mexico
Grades 7–9, 3,132
telesecundarias in 2,110
localities.
896,274
For every telesecundaria per
50 children, 10 more
children enroll in secondary
education, and 2 more
pursue further education.
Every year of education
induced by telesecundaria,
increased income by 17.6%.
USD 704 per student
per year, including
all administrative
costs.
Piper et al.
(2016)
Four experimental groups: base PRIMR
program (early literacy program focused on
teacher training, instructional support, and
student learning materials at 1:1 ratio),
PRIMR plus a tablet for the teacher to scaffold
their instruction, PRIMR for pupils e-readers
with age-appropriate textbooks, and a control
group. Although there was randomization at
the school-level, there were still imbalances in
baseline characteristics, so authors prefer a
difference-in-differences strategy.
Kenya
Grade 2. 80 schools in
Kisumu county.
1,580
All treatment arms had
positive effects ranging from
0.17–0.29 SD in English,
and 0.26–0.32 SD in
Kiswahili. The most effect
arm was the basic PRIMR
arm.
Cost of tablet is USD
150, cost of eReader
is USD 70. The cost
of the basic PRIMR
program was USD
2.28 per pupil per
subject per year.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.5. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Pitchford (2015)
Three experimental arms: math tablet
intervention, non-math tablet control, and
standard face-to-face practice. Intervention
lasted 8 weeks, for 30-min per day. The math
tablet intervention consisted of four different
apps developed by onebillion©. Apps based on
the National Primary Curriculum
Randomization at individual level.
Malawi
Grades 1–3, One
medium-sized urban
primary school.
318
Positive, and statistically
significant effects in math
and language. Authors do
not provide enough
information to translate into
SD units.
Not specified.
Seo (2017)
Program: GivePower school program. Six
experimental groups: G1 schools received two
0.12 kWh solar home systems including lights
and TVs (“facilities”); G2, solar facilities and
English videos; G3, solar facilities and bilingual
videos; G4, English videos only; G5, bilingual
videos only; and control schools.
Tanzania
Grade 11, 164 schools in
northern Tanzania.
Schools are between the
national median (57)
and the mean (75) in
terms of enrollment.
11,697
Impact of
solar-facilities-enabled
programs, averaged across
video-provision status, to be
0.05 SD on secondary exit
exam (across all subjects),
and 2.8 p.p on passing rates.
USD 6.41 per
student.
Yanguas (2020)
Analysis of long-term effects of “Plan Ceibal”,
or a one-laptop-per-child in Uruguay (whose
short-term results are described in de Melo,
et al., 2014). Study leverages cross-cohort
variation and it is the first study with long-term,
causal estimates of this kind of policy.
Uruguay
Adults exposed to
one-laptop-per-child
policy as children. All
students in public
primary and middle
schools .
12,775
No effects on educational
attainment as an adult. For
college-goers, enrollment in
the program led to lower
likelihood of enrolling in
science and technology
majors.
Same as in de Melo
(2014), et al. USD
180 per laptop.
Notes: All randomized controlled trials indicate the level at which units were randomized. For the full coding and more detailed information on all the core studies included in
the review, please see this online document. The statistical significance of the findings stems from what each of the studies reports, and the alpha threshold for significance
may vary by disciplinary approach of each paper. Abbreviations: “p.p.”: percentage points, “SD”: standard deviations.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.6. Summary of All Studies Included Within the “Technology-enabled Behavioral Interventions” Category
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Adelman et al.
(2015)
Directors received a smartphone with a
built-in system to allow school directors to
send information about the school to a
centralized server, including daily
photographs of teachers to verify presence.
School inspectors could then access the
server in real time for efficient supervision.
Haiti
Teachers. 200 public
and private primary
schools.
2,260
No effects on test scores. The
program did not improve
management practices such as
record keeping either. Low
take-up.
Not specified.
Aker and Ksoll
(2019)
Treatment consisted of a mobile phone
monitoring program, where students,
teachers and village chiefs were called on a
weekly basis, over a six-week period. No
phones or incentives were provided. 140
schools were assigned to an adult education
program, and 20 to the pure control group.
Among the 140 schools, half were assigned
to monitoring. Randomization at
village-level.
Niger
Adult learners. 160
villages, stratified by
regional, and
sub-regional
administrative divisions.
1,776
individu-
als, 160
villages.
Monitoring increased reading
by 0.14–0.30 SD, and math by
0.08–0.15 SD. Villages with
no monitoring had no effects
relative to the pure control
villages.
Overall reported cost
of mobile
monitoring was USD
6.5 per village.
Berkhout et al.
(2020)
Impact evaluation of the effect on test
scores (implicitly on cheating) of switching
to computer-based testing (CBT) for the
high-stakes, national examination of junior
secondary schools in Indonesia.
Indonesia
Grades 9 and 12.
50,124 junior
secondary schools
nationally.
353,190
students.
The introduction of
computer-based testing (CBT)
decreased scores by 0.40 SD,
interpreted as a decrease in
cheating. However, results
become insignificant after two
years of the introduction of
CBT, suggesting that actual
learning had to happen to
compensate for the loss in test
scores due to the curtailing of
cheating.
Not specified.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.6. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Berlinski et al.
(2016)
Program: “Parents up to date”. High-frequency
information about their selected child via text
message (SMS messages). SMS texts contained
specific information on attendance, behavior,
and math test scores of each parent’s child.
Randomization at individual-level, along with
share of students treated in each class.
Chile
Grades 4–8. 85 classes
in metropolitan area.
1,447
0.08 SD in math after only 4
months. Probability of
passing a grade increased by
2.8 percentage points.
Increase probability of
attending school for more
than 85% of the time
(threshold needed for grade
progression) by more than
6.6 p.p.
Not specified.
“Low-cost
intervention”.
Duflo et al.
(2012)
Teacher attendance in treatment schools was
monitored using cameras, and their salaries
was linked to their attendance. Instructions for
one student to take a picture of the teacher at
the start and end of the work day. Cameras has
tamper-proof date and time functions.
Attendance was tracked for 30 months.
Randomization at school-level.
India
Teachers. 113
single-teacher
non-formal education
centers/schools in rural
villages of Rajasthan.
113
teachers.
2,230
students at
baseline.
Teacher absenteeism fell by
21 percentage points, and
test scores increased by 0.17
SD.
Not specified.
Dustan et al.
(2019)
SMS campaign to increase civil servants’
compliance with maintenance activities. Each
SMS contains a fixed and a variable component.
The fixed component includes the bureaucrat’s
first name and the deadline for task compliance.
These fixed elements are rooted in behavioral
insights. The variable component is the main
behavioral lever, which could be a
reminder/warning, social norm, monitoring,
shaming, auditing threat, or a control
condition. Randomization at school-level.
Peru
Civil servants in charge
of a school maintenance
program. 24,000
schools across Peru.
24,268
Increase of 3.86 p.p. in the
probability of submitting an
expense report by deadline,
no evidence that the SMS
campaign affected the
quality of most of the
infrastructure items.
Total cost of 57,860
SMS was USD 1,273,
and the labor costs
associated with the
programming and
sending of the SMS
were USD 188 for
the full campaign.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.6. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Gaduh et al.
(2020)
Intervention had three different treatment
arms. The first treatment arm provides a
scorecard which evaluates the use of a
government allowance. The second and third
treatments added to the first treatment a
pay-for-performance scheme that relied on
included the first treatment. The second
treatment added a camera with a timestamp
which made the allowance dependent on
teacher presence. The third treatment the
payment of the allowance depended on the
result of the scorecard. Randomization at
school-level.
Indonesia
Teachers, 270 mostly
public schools in 5
districts.
3,832
students,
827
teachers.
Gains across all treatment
arms; largest in treatment
arm with camera: 0.18 SD in
language, 0.20 SD in Math.
Camera treatment arm
showed positive, imprecise
estimates on teacher
behavior, working at school,
and teaching in class.
USD 40 per student.
John et al.
(2016)
Impact evaluation of an electronic career
guidance package for secondary schools, the
e-Career Guidance System.
Nigeria
Grade 8, 2 public
secondary schools in
Akwa Ibom state.
60 students.
Positive effects in vocational
and career outcomes. Not
enough information to
translate gains into SD units.
Not specified.
Neilson et al.
(2018a)
Videos and infographics informing about the
returns to education at different educational
levels. Randomization at the school-level.
Peru
Grades 1–11, but
learning outcomes only
measured for Grade 8.
2,626 public schools in
all department capitals
across Peru, and 250
rural schools in Cusco
and Arequipa.
Not
specified.
Reduction of school dropout
in urban areas (after second
year of implementation,
once take-up of treatment
was higher) by 1.8 p.p., or
18.8% of the baseline; in
rural areas the reduction
was 7.2 p.p. or 50% of the
baseline. Effects on math
were 0.04 SD, and on
reading were 0.03 SD.
At the scale of
25,000 students,
authors estimate the
cost would be USD
0.06 per student.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.6. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Neilson et al.
(2018b)
Videos and infographics informing about
the returns to education at different
educational levels. Randomization was at
the school-level, where 1524 schools were
selected for treatment.
Dominican
Republic
Grades 7–12, 2,469
public schools.
∼120,000
Preliminary results show
that the informative and
persuasive videos both led to
decreases in school dropout,
and increases in
standardized test scores.
Major costs were
production and
elaboration of the
videos ($104,000).
Riley (2017)
Students watched a film projection of
“Queen of Katwe”, a movie about a teenage
girl from the slums of Kampala, Uganda
striving to become a chess master, as a way
to change students’ beliefs about the
importance of education. Randomization at
the student-level.
Uganda
Grades 10 and 12, 13
secondary schools in
urban Kampala.
1,446
0.11 SD in math for grade
10, 0.13 SD in math for
grade 12; 9 percentage
points more likely to
continue enrolled in
secondary school.
USD 5 per student.
Vakis and Farfan
(2018)
SMS campaign with potentially useful
information for teachers, such as reminders
about deadlines, teacher benefits,
motivational texts, and occupational
wellness. No pure control group, as control
group got at least two informative texts, and
once on Teachers’ day. The teacher’s name
was in some messages.
Peru
Teachers. 35,000
schools nationally, only
teachers that registered
for the program.
Experimental
sample: 13145
teachers, rolled
out nationally
to 186,000
teachers.
3 p.p. increase in questions
about job satisfaction and
motivation. Likely
underestimate, given that
there was no pure control
group.
Each SMS costs USD
0.03.
Notes: All randomized controlled trials indicate the level at which units were randomized. For the full coding and more detailed information on all the core studies included in
the review, please see this online document. The statistical significance of the findings stems from what each of the studies reports, and the alpha threshold for significance
may vary by disciplinary approach of each paper. Abbreviations: “p.p.”: percentage points, “SD”: standard deviations.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.7. Summary of All Studies Included Within the “Improvements to instruction” Category
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Angrist et al.
(2021)
Two low-technology interventions to
substitute schooling during this period:
SMS text messages with “problems of the
week”, and direct phone calls with
instruction (15–20 minutes) plus the
SMS. Randomization at the student-level.
Botswana
Grades 3–5. 103 schools
across 9 out of 10
regions in Botswana.
4,550
0.16 SD in math from
SMS intervention, and
0.29 SD in math from
phone call intervention.
Increased parental
engagement.
0.12 SD in math
from phone call and
SMS intervention.
No effects from
SMS-only treatment
arm.
Beg et al. (2019)
Program: “eLearn”. Program delivers
expert math and science content through
short videos with multimedia
presentations, for four months of
exposure. Curriculum tailored to local 8th
grade curriculum. After each lecture,
there would be multiple-choice review
questions, a small tablet for teachers to
project the material for their own review,
and an LED screen installed in each
classroom. Some teacher training on how
to use the tablets was provided. 29 hours
of content during regular class time.
Randomization at school-level.
Pakistan
Grade 8. 100 schools in
Punjab.
2,622
0.26 SD in Math, 0.26 in
Science, 0.33 SD in
combined score. Small
increases in student and
teacher attendance.
USD 15 per student
with the inclusion of
high fixed-costs at
the scale of 100
schools, USD 9 was
the marginal cost
per student.
Berlinski and
Busso (2017)
Program: testing a pedagogical
intervention designed to give students a
more active role in learning geometry,
along with different technological
complements. One pure control group and
four treatment arms: 1) active learning,
2), active learning plus an interactive
whiteboard, 3) active learning plus a
computer lab, 4) active learning plus one
computer per student. Randomization at
the school-level.
Costa Rica
Grade 7. 85 schools.
18,000
students and
190 teachers.
Sample was
nationally
representative.
Negative effects of
−0.17 SD for active
learning alone, and
−0.25 SD for active
learning plus
technology. No
treatment arm had
positive effects. High
take-up by teachers.
Not specified.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.7. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Bianchi et al.
(2019)
Evaluation of government reform that
connected high-quality teachers in urban areas
with more than 100 million students in rural
middle schools through satellite internet over
four years. First difference in cohort, and second
difference in geographic location, leveraging
staggered implementation.
China
Middle schoolers, Rural
schools in China.
4,479
0.18 SD in math 7–10 years
later, 0.21 SD in Chinese.
Share of people investing in
informal education
increased 9.8 p.p., earnings
increased, increased
likelihood of being in more
analytical and less manual
jobs, increased internet and
computer usage.
Project served 100
million students,
costing CNY 8.78
billion (USD 1.24
billion), or
approximately USD
12.4 per student
served.
Blimpo et al.
(2020)
The program targets math and science
instruction through incorporation of
technology that enhances students’
participation. The program provided computers
for teachers, scripted lessons, and customized
software; equipped classrooms with smart
projectors (smartboards) and handheld devices
(smart responders) that students can use to
respond to teachers; as well as provided
textbooks for students. Treatment also included
“student responders”, are battery-operated,
wireless handheld devices that allow students to
provide responses simultaneously, and allows
teachers to monitor and track students’
responses in real-time.
The
Gambia
Grade 12 (measured
outcomes), program for
grades 1–12, 24 schools
across The Gambia
1044
0.54 SD on Math, 0.20 SD in
English, increased
probability of passing
secondary exit exam by
15 p.p.
∼USD 3,000 per
classroom.
Böhmer et al.
(2014)
After-school mathematics intervention aimed to
fill knowledge gaps using computer-assisted
learning (CAL). Khan Academy resources were
used to teach basic numeracy. Each individual
has full autonomy over which exercises they
attempt. Gamefication is used to incentivize and
engage the learners Randomization at the
individual-level.
South
Africa
Grade 8. 9 schools in
Western Cape circuit,
which had to meet the
criteria of good
management and a
working computer
laboratory with an
internet connection.
472
0.32 SD on basic numeracy
questions, and 0.25 SD on
core grade 8 curriculum
questions.
Not specified.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.7. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Borzekowski
(2018)
Showing of educational videos at school, part of
the “Akili and Me” series. “Aliki and Me” is an
animated series teaching school readiness skills,
in both Kiswahili and English. The videos were
contextually-relevant and sensitive.
Randomization at the student-level.
Tanzania
Pre-school. 9 randomly
selected schools in
peri-urban areas of
Morogoro.
595
Positive effects across several
fields of basic numeracy and
literacy. ∼0.15 SD in English
and 0.22 SD in counting.
Not specified.
Borzekowski and
Henry (2010)
Showing of “Jalan Sesama”, a multimedia
educational project, developed for Indonesian
children. Television episodes presenting
educational messages regarding literacy and
numeracy, health and safety, social
development, and environmental and cultural
awareness. Randomization at the
individual-level.
Indonesia
Children age 3–6.
Children selected from
remote areas which
typically have poor
reception of broadcast
television three main
locations (Munjul, Kota
Dukuh, and Gunung
Batu village) from the
Munjul subdistrict.
160
0.12 SD fin early cognitive skills
or the low-exposure group and
0.35 SD for the high-exposure
group.
Not specified.
Borzekowski
et al. (2019a)
Evaluation of the adaption and testing the
Tanzanian-made program, Akili and Me
(studied in Borzekowski), for children’s viewing
in Rwanda. Randomization at the student-level.
Rwanda
Pre-school to grade 2.
Randomly-selected
kindergartens and
primary school in
Gihara.
434
Statistically significant increases
in math and language. Not
enough information provided to
reliably convert coefficients into
SD units.
Not specified.
Borzekowski
et al. (2019b)
Showing of Galli Galli Sim Sim, the Indian
version of Sesame Street, 30 min of television
five days a week for twelve weeks, varying how
much Galli Galli Sim Sim versus other
programming children watched.
Randomization at the school-level.
India
Pre-school, 99
preschools in Lucknow,
with children ages 3–7.
1.340
Overall literacy score reports
effects between 0.24–0.37 SD,
and numeracy scores effects of
0.15–0.20 SD.
Not specified.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.7. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Cilliers et al.
(2020)
Three year follow up of Kotze et al. (2019).
South
Africa
Grades 1–3, 180 public
schools located in
low-income rural
communities in the
Mpumalanga province.
2,684
After 3 years, the in-person
coaching arm achieved
improvements in oral
language of 0.31 SD and
reading proficiency of 0.13
SD. The in-person treatment
arm achieved gains in oral
language of 0.12 SD and no
gains in reading proficiency.
Furthermore, the virtual
coaching induced a negative
effect on home language
literacy.
The cost per learner
per year of the
on-site program is
USD 66, and the cost
per learner per year
of the virtual
program was USD
51.
De Hoop et al.
(2020a)
Evaluation of a “e-School 360” model, a
multi-faceted program that integrates
technology into education, provides ongoing
teacher training and professional development,
and includes community ownership.
Zambia
Grades 1–3. 63 schools
across 3 rural districts in
the Zambia’s Eastern
Province.
1,924
0.33 SD in reading, and
0.14 SD in math.
The cost of the
program was USD 5
per month per
student.
Gambari et al.
(2016)
Video-based cooperative, competitive and
individualized instructional strategies on the
performance of senior secondary schools’
students in geometry in Nigeria. The treatment
involved identification of some difficult concepts
in mathematics that were developed in simpler
instructional module using video instruction
platform. Randomization at the school-level.
Nigeria
Senior secondary
students, 4 secondary
schools in Minna.
120
Positive effects on all
treatment arms, not enough
information to translate into
SD units.
Not specified.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.7. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Johnston and
Ksoll (2017)
Broadcasting live instruction via satellite to
rural primary school students. Classrooms in 70
randomly selected schools equipped with the
technology required to connect to a studio in
Accra. Randomization at school-level.
Ghana
Grades 2–4, 144
schools, districts of the
Volta and Greater Accra
regions; districts
classified by Ghanaian
government as
“deprived”.
4,545
0.23 SD in math, no effects
in reading fluency overall,
but gains in foundational
skills (letter and word
identification), no effects on
classroom attendance nor
time-on-task.
USD 22 per student,
as authors estimate
USD 100 per
standard deviation
gained. Estimate
includes fixed-costs,
which authors claim
to be a large
proportion of total
costs.
Kotze et al.
(2019)
Two different versions of coaching within a
structured pedagogic program, the
conventional form of one-on-one on-site
instructional coaching, and virtual coaching,
which involves using a tablet, cellular phone
calls, and daily text messaging.
South
Africa
Grades 1–3. 180 public
schools located in
low-income rural
communities in the
Mpumalanga province.
3,227
Not enough information to
convert point estimates into
SD units. However,
researchers find that
“students from the two
intervention groups
performed consistently
better than the control
students” on most
numeracy and literacy tasks.
The per-student
costs of the on-site
coaching and the
virtual coaching
models do not differ
dramatically, and are
US$48 and US$43,
respectively, per year.
Lehrer et al.
(2019)
Evaluation of “Sankoré” equipment, which
consisted of classroom provision of interactive
whiteboards.
Senegal
Grades 1–2. 173 initially
surveyed schools in
Dakar, Diourbel,
Kaolack, Thiès, and
Fatick.
14,713
0.186 SD in math.
Not specified.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.7. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Näslund-Hadley
et al. (2014)
Program: “Tikichuela”. Intervention consists of
interactive audio segments that cover the entire
preschool math curriculum. Since Paraguayan
classrooms tend to be bilingual, the audio and
written materials use a combination of Spanish
and Guaraní. Audio lessons were implemented
four days a week, with one day set aside to
review what had been learned during the week.
This extra day gave teachers flexibility to review
topics that, according to their observation, the
children needed more practice or assistance in
addressing. The average duration of each class
was 60 minutes. Randomization at the
school-level.
Paraguay
Pre-school. 265 schools
in department of
Cordillera
2,907
0.16 SD in math.
Not specified.
Naik et al.
(2016)
Technology-assisted teaching to replace
one-third of in-school instructional time.
Intervention combines computers and
broadband connectivity with more
conventional satellite technology to deliver
classes taught by expert teachers at a central
location using multimedia teaching aids. These
lectures cover the standard syllabus prescribed
for all schools in the state by the State
Department of Education.
India
Grades 5–10. 1,823
rural, public schools
across 18 districts in
Karnataka. Data
collection performed
only in sub-sample of
105 treatment schools,
and 98 comparison
schools.
14,084
0.1–0.2 SD in math,
0.2–0.3 SD in science,
0.2–0.4 in English.
USD 1.7 per student
per year.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.7. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Wennersten
et al. (2015)
Program: BridgeIT. Teachers of Standard 5
and 6 English and Science classes were
notified of the availability of new videos via
text messages (SMS), which they
downloaded onto their phones using an
open-source application and showed, with
suggested activities, to students on a TV
screen using a TV-out cable. Participation
was not randomized, it was simply rolled out
in certain schools first, chosen by funders
and implementers.
India
Grades 5 and 6, 86
schools in Andhra
Pradesh and Tamil
Nadu.
3,327
0.36 SD in English in both
states. 0.98 in Science in
Andhra Pradesh. Science
gains not reported for TN.
USD 10.50 per
student.
Wolf et al.
(2018)
Three experimental arms: teacher training,
teacher training plus parental-awareness
meetings, and controls. The programs
incorporated workshops and in-classroom
coaching for teachers. The technology
portion was the video-based discussion
groups for parents. Randomization at the
school-level.
Ghana
Teachers in public and
private kindergartens in
the Greater Accra
Region, 240 schools.
444
teachers,
and 3345
children.
Treatment arm with
parental intervention has
effects of ∼0.14 SD in
overall school readiness,
∼0.09 SD in math, ∼0.08 in
literacy. The branch without
parental intervention had
slightly higher, statistically
significant effects. Parental
meetings had no effect on
the effectiveness of the
teacher training.
Not specified.
Notes: All randomized controlled trials indicate the level at which units were randomized. For the full coding and more detailed information on all the core studies included in
the review, please see this online document. The statistical significance of the findings stems from what each of the studies reports, and the alpha threshold for significance
may vary by disciplinary approach of each paper. Abbreviations: “p.p.”: percentage points, “SD”: standard deviations.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.8. Summary of All Studies Included Within the “Self-led learning” Category
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Abrami et al.
(2016)
Interactive, multimedia literacy software
for 90 minutes per week, for 13 weeks.
Randomization at the class-level.
Kenya
Grade 2. 12 classes.
429
Gains in certain areas
such as reading
comprehension and
listening skills. Not
enough condensed
information to translate
into gains in SD.
Not specified.
Araya et al.
(2019)
Program: “ConectaIdeas”, two weekly,
90-minute sessions in a computer lab
where students solve math exercises.
Software can create individual and group
competitions. Competitions were intra-
and inter-schools. Software shows each
student how many exercises have been
completed, and compares it with class
average. Personalized “ads” are shown
regularly to motivate students.
Randomization at the class-level.
Chile
Grades 4, in 24
schools. Public
schools in Chile
attended by
socioeconomically
disadvantaged
students who also
significantly lagged in
math achievement.
1,089
0.27 SD in math, no
effect in language.
Increased students’
preference to use
technology for math
learning, promoted the
idea that studying can
raise intelligence.
Increased math anxiety
and reduced willingness
to collaborate in groups.
USD 150 per
student cost, 5%
increase in public
expenditure per
primary student
in Chile
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.8. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Bai et al.
(2016)
Computer-assisted complement to English
class. Comparison between “computed
assisted instruction” (CAI; program
integrated with curriculum), “computer
assisted learning” (CAL; not integrated
into teacher’s instruction), and a pure
control group. The integrated program
included three parts: a curriculum, a
lesson-by-lesson English Teaching Plan,
and a set of instructions on teacher
responsibilities. English teachers in CAL
and CAI were also compensated with 80
USD per semester. Randomization at
school-level.
China
Grade 5 in 127
schools. Rural schools
in Haidong Prefecture
in Qinghai Province.
6,304
No effects of pooled test
for CAI/CAL, effects of
0.07 SD for CAI when
tested separately.
Suggestive evidence that
CAL did help higher
performers.
Not specified.
Banerjee et al.
(2007)
Program: Pratham-developed program
during year 1, program developed by
Media-Pro during year 2. Two hours per
week during or before/after school, with
two children per computer. Software
linked to Gujarat’s curriculum, focusing
on basic skills. Software changes the
question difficulty by ability.
Randomization at the school-level.
India
Grade 4. 110 schools.
Mumbai and
Vadodara.
∼5,500
0.35 SD in math for year
1; 0.48 SD in math for
year 2. Math effects
persisted one year after
leaving intervention. No
effect on language either
year. No effect on
attendance.
USD 15 per
student per year.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.8. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Bettinger et al.
(2020)
Intervention tested computer-assisted learning
program, with theoretical implications for
estimation of educational production function.
Three treatment arms: a base dosage CAL arm
with ∼20–25 minutes per week of math CAL
and ∼20–25 minutes of language CAL; a
double-dosage CAL arm with ∼40–50 minutes
of math CAL and ∼40–50 minutes of language
CAL; and a control arm. The software is
adaptive to each student’s level. Randomization
at the class-level.
Russian
Federation
Grade 3. 343 schools.
5,621
0.11–0.12 SD in math for
base dosage, and similar
results for the
double-dosage-level arm.
0.06–0.07 in language for
the base dosage arm, and no
effects in language for the
double-dosage arm. The
differences between the two
treatment arms are not
statistically significant in
either subject.
Not specified.
Brown et al.
(2020)
Program evaluation of a digital game-based
learning program (“Can’t Wait to Learn”).
Sudan
Children age 7–9. 8
villages in Sudan
221
Positive effects in math,
Arabic, and psychological
well-being. Not enough
information provided to
translate gains into SD units.
Not specified.
Büchel et al.
(2020)
Comparison of relative effectiveness of
computer-assisted learning (CAL) and
traditional teaching. The first treatment arm is
pure CAL, the second is CAL plus traditional
teaching, and the control group is traditional
classroom teaching. Each experimental arm
consisted of 90 minutes of additional
instruction per week. Randomization at the
school class-level.
El Salvador
Grades 3–6. 198 school
classes in Morazán
across 29 schools.
3,197
0.21 SD from CAL, 0.24 SD
of CAL plus supervisor
(difference not statistically
significant).
The cost per child is
44 USD for the
traditional teaching
arm, 43 USD for the
CAL arm, and 56
USD for the CAL plus
teacher.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.8. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Carrillo et al.
(2011)
Program: “Personalized Complementary
and Interconnected Learning (APCI)
program”. Computer-aided instruction in
mathematics and language, 3 hours per
week during school. Personalized
curriculum based on screening test; fixed
after screening test. Randomization at the
school-level.
Ecuador
Grade 5. 16 schools.
Public schools in
Guayaquil.
1,061
0.30 SD in math, and no
effect on language.
Larger gains for students
at the top of the
achievement
distribution.
Not specified.
Chong et al.
(2020)
Mandatory six-month Internet-based
sexual education course. Randomization
at the school*classroom level (to allow for
analyses of spillovers).
Colombia
Grades 9. 138 classes
across 69 junior high
schools in 21
Colombian cities.
4,599
0.4 SD increase in
knowledge about sexual
education, 0.2 SD in
attitudes, and 55%
increase in likelihood of
redeeming vouchers for
condoms.
USD 14.7 per
student per
semester.
De Hoop et al.
(2020b)
Program evaluation of a digital
game-based learning program (“Can’t
Wait to Learn”).
Jordan
Grades 1–3. 35
schools within Zarqa
Governorate.
709
No effects in math,
Arabic, and
psychological well-being.
Not specified.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.8. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Derksen et al.
(2020)
Evaluation of program providing access to
Wikipedia. Randomization at the
student-level.
Malawi
Grades 8–10. 4
government boarding
schools.
1508
Gains in English of
0.103 SD.
USD 4 per student.
Freeman and
Hawkins
(2017)
Evaluation of “Evoke”, a game-based
interactive environment. Evoke is a
project-based learning module, using
storytelling, virtual games, and social
networks, which connects students with
their peers and mentors. Randomization
at the class-level.
Colombia
University students,
two thirds being
between 18–22 years
old. Recruitment in
14 university classes.
297
Gains in “21st century
and socioemotional
skills”. Authors do not
provide enough
information to translate
gains into standard
deviation units.
Not specified.
He et al.
(2008)
Two interventions, only one of which
involves an EdTech intervention. This
intervention consists of a “PicTalk”
machine, which is designed to be used by a
single student who with the help of a
stylus, can point to pictures and hear the
word pronounced. Learner could choose
topics, and within each topic, what words
to point to. The other, non-EdTech,
intervention consisted of sets of flashcards
designed to cover the same competencies
as the PicTalk machine. Randomization at
the school-level.
India
Grades 1–5. 97
schools in Thane
Municipal School
District, and 242
schools in Mangaon
sub-district
government schools.
15,062
students
across all
years, all
schools.
0.25–0.35 SD,
depending on
specification. Stronger
students benefit more
from the more self-paced
machine-based
implementation.
USD 20.46 per
student in Thane,
and USD 11.20
per student in
Mangaon
(including costs of
machines and
material
development).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.8. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Hirshleifer.
(2016)
Treatment consists of a math software
curriculum implemented in all classrooms
of the intervention. The main research
question focuses on whether incentivizing
inputs (the completion of learning
modules) is more effective than the
incentivizing of outputs (a test at the end
of each module). The incentives were
small monetary rewards. Randomization
at the treatment level using a partial
rotation design.
India
Grades 4–6. 45
classrooms in
Mumbai and Pune.
3,218
0.57 SD in math for the
branch incentivizing the
inputs, and 0.24 SD for
the branch incentivizing
outputs.
Maximum
incentive was USD
2.65 per student
(200 rupees of
rewards).
Ito et al.
(2019)
Treatment consisted of 20 30-minute
classes when students were allowed to use
an app-based computer-aided instruction
instead of regular math classes. Adaptive
learning with algorithm in response to the
proficiency level of each individual.
Randomization was at the class-level.
Cambodia
Grades 1–4. 5 public
elementary schools
near Phnom Penn.
1,636
0.56–0.67 SD in math
scores, increases in
subjective expectation of
being able to attend
tertiary education. No
effects on motivation.
Not specified.
Jere-Folotiya
et al. (2014)
Evaluation of computer-based literacy
game. Randomization at the student-level.
Zambia
Grade 1. 42
government schools
in Lusaka.
573
Positive effects in
spelling. Not enough
information to translate
into SD units.
Not specified.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.8. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Lai et al.
(2013)
Two 40-min mandatory sessions per week
during lunch breaks or after school, teams
of 2 children. Based on national
curriculum. Reinforced material taught
that week Program was remedial in
nature. Randomization at the school-level.
China
Grade 3 and 5. 72
schools rural
boarding schools in
Shaanxi.
2,726
0.12 SD in math, no
effects in language across
both grades.
Not specified.
Lai et al.
(2015)
Two 40-min mandatory sessions per week
during lunch breaks or after school, teams
of 2 children. Based on national
curriculum. Reinforced material taught
that week Program was remedial in
nature. Randomization at the school-level.
China
Grade 3. 43 migrant
schools in Beijing.
2,369
None in language, 0.15
SD in math, 0.31 points
in 1–10 scale asking
about whether child
“likes school”.
Not specified.
Lai et al.
(2016)
Two 40-min mandatory sessions per week
during lunch breaks or after school, teams
of 2 children. Based on national
curriculum. Reinforced material taught
that week Program was remedial in
nature. Randomization at the school-level.
China
Grade 3. 57 rural
schools in Qinghai.
6,865
0.15 SD in both math
and language.
USD 7.6 per
student.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.8. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Linden (2008)
Program: Gyan Shala Computer Assisted
Learning program. Two children with one
computer (split screen), two versions of
the treatment. Version 1: one hour per
during school, version 2: one hour per day
after schools. Reinforces material taught
that day. Randomization at the
school-level.
India
Grades 2–3, 60
schools. Gyan Shala
schools in Gujarat.
779
−0.57 SD in math as a
substitute, and 0.28 SD
in math as a
complement.
USD 5.2 per
student.
Lysenko et al.
(2019)
Evaluation of computer-based literacy
game.
Kenya
Grades 1–3. 48
classes
1,899
Positive effects in
spelling. Not enough
information to translate
into SD units.
Not specified.
Ma et al.
(2020)
Three experimental branches: 1) pure
control group, 2) supplemental
computer-assisted learning, 3)
supplemental workbook. The program
sessions were held once a week for 9
months. Randomization happened at the
class-level.
China
Grades 4–6. 130
schools from 9
impoverish counties.
4,024
No effects of the pure
technology portion of
the intervention.
USD 18 per
student.
Mo et al.
(2014a)
Two 40-min mandatory sessions per week
during lunch breaks or after school, teams
of 2 children. Based on national
curriculum. Reinforced material taught
that week Program was remedial in
nature. Randomization at the school-level.
China
Grade 3, and 5. 72
rural schools in
Shaanxi.
4,757
0.17 SD in math.
USD 9,439 in total
over one year.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.8. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Mo et al.
(2014b)
Two 40-min mandatory sessions per week
during lunch breaks or after school, teams
of 2 children. Based on national
curriculum. Reinforced material taught
that week Program was remedial in
nature. Randomization at the school-level.
China
Grade 3, and 5. 72
rural schools in
Shaanxi.
2,741
0.25–0.26 SD in math.
USD 9,439 in total
over one year.
Muralidharan
et al. (2019)
Program: “Mindspark”. Evaluation of
after-school Mindspark centers, which
scheduled 6 days of instruction per week,
with 90 minutes per day, for 4.5 months.
Half of each session was self-driven
learning on Mindspark software, and the
other half consisted of instructional
support from a teaching assistant in
groups of 12–15 students. Technology-led
instructional program, software
benchmarks the initial learning level of
every student and dynamically
personalize the material to match the level
and rate of progress made by each
student. Randomization at the
student-level.
India
Grades 4–9. Students
recruited from 5
public middle schools
in Delhi.
619
0.37 SD in Math, 0.23 in
Hindi.
USD 15 per
student per
month.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Table S1.8. Continued
Study
Intervention
Context
Target grade and
outcomes
Sample
Findings
Cost
Pitchford et al.
(2018)
Three experiments reported, testing the
effectiveness of apps developed by onebillion©.
Eighteen 30-min sessions on average across the
14-month study period. Note that treatment
was not randomly selected, but rather the
government chose one school per district to be
treated, and researchers chose a similar
comparison school. Hence, this is closer to PSM
than to an RCT.
Malawi
Grades 1–2. 14 schools
across seven education
districts across Malawi.
1,217
Gains in math in the order of
0.19–0.62, depending on
gender, and gains of
0.33–0.46 in reading. Girls
benefited more from the
intervention.
Not specified.
Rosas et al.
(2002)
Introduction of educational video-games in the
classroom. Students in the experimental group
were exposed to an average of 30 hours over a
three-month period. The games had a
self-regulation system that dynamically adapted
the level of difficulty of the contents to the
player’s learning pace, presenting the player
contents based on his or her level of knowledge.
The games had a progressive and increasing
level of difficulty, based on the presentation of
antagonists and obstacles. According to the
child’s performance, the game provided
feedback indicating if he or she chose the
correct or incorrect answer.
Chile
Grades 1–2.
Economically
disadvantaged schools.
1,274
Positive, and statistically
significant effects in math
and language. Authors do
not provide enough
information to translate into
SD units.
Not specified.
“Low-cost
videogame”.
Notes: All randomized controlled trials indicate the level at which units were randomized. For the full coding and more detailed information on all the core studies included in
the review, please see this online document. The statistical significance of the findings stems from what each of the studies reports, and the alpha threshold for significance
may vary by disciplinary approach of each paper. Abbreviations: “p.p.”: percentage points, “SD”: standard deviations.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Classification of Studies
The studies identified reflect significant diversity in the types of treatments, contexts,
targeted stakeholders, and scale of interventions. In practice, this diversity had sev-
eral implications for how this study was conducted. First, no attempts to conduct a
formal meta-analysis with unified meta-point estimates was made. The main reason
for this methodological choice was that any aggregate estimate of whether “EdTech
works in developing countries” would just mask the crucial heterogeneity that stems
from the broad definition of EdTech used for this review, the dependence of effective-
ness on the context, and the targeted outcomes. Instead, the core studies were coded
into four broad thematic categories: “Access to technology,” “Technology-enabled be-
havioral interventions,” “Improvements to instruction,” and “Self-led learning.”3 In-
terestingly, the four thematic categories of Escueta et al. (2020) do not fully overlap
with the categories for this review, as the type of intervention and issues addressed in
the current body of literature varies greatly between developed and developing coun-
tries. In reality, studies may not neatly fit into one category or the other. For instance,
anargumentcouldbemadethatallthe“One-Laptop-per-Child”(OLPC)interventions
like Beuermann et al. (2015), Cristia et al. (2017), de Melo (2014), and Cordero-Meza
(2017) were ultimately about “self-led learning” at home, not necessarily access to
technology. However, given that the most proximate goal of the project was to in-
crease children’s access to technology, these were categorized as “access.” The table
below displays the breakdown of all core studies into the category which they were
assigned for the current review, as it is also shown for each study on online tables
S1.1–S1.4.
Other Study Features Which Were Not Part of the Inclusion and
Exclusion Criteria
In the spirit of following Escueta et al. (2020) to be as inclusive of high-quality, rele-
vant studies as possible, this review makes the explicit decision to not filter papers by
any other criterion not mentioned above. Among the potential filtering criteria that
did not play a role in the selection of the core studies, the time of publication is one of
the most salient ones: there was no minimum year for the inclusion of a paper in the
review, especially given that the oldest study found dates back to only 2002. Since not
all studies have been published in an academic journal, the date for each study refers
to either the date of publication in a peer-reviewed journal, or the date on the latest
draft found for each study. Figure S1.1 below provides a sense of the temporal distri-
bution of studies: interestingly, the number has increased significantly since 2013,
reaching 15 studies only for 2019. This time trend highlights the growing interest in
3. For the full coding and more detailed information on all the core studies included in the review, please see this online document.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Figure S1.1. Number of Studies in This Review by the Year of Their Latest Draft
the field of education in developing settings from researchers, and the further need
for a compilation of all existing evidence to date.
Another feature which was not used to filter studies was the targeted outcomes
and stakeholders. While 89 percent of all core studies either only targeted learning
outcomes, or had it as one of its main outcomes of interests, there were other impor-
tant outcomes studied, such as school enrollment, dropout rates, sexual health be-
haviors, and motivation. Similarly, the review was open to studies targeting all kinds
of educational stakeholders. A vast majority of the interventions (83 percent) were
student-facing and targeted students in grades 1–12, but there were other groups
studied included such pre-K students, university students, teachers, civil servants,
and parents.
Finally, the scale of the technology used did not play a role in the selection of the
studies. The studied technology could be a large national rollout requiring large in-
vestments such as telesecundarias in Mexico (Navarro-Sola 2019), or lower-touch
text message interventions in Peru such as in Neilson et al. (2018a, 2018b). Similarly,
there was no restriction on the sample size for the study, ranging from a few hundred
observations like in Pitchford (2015), Mo et al. (2013), or Böhmer et al. (2014), to
upwards of 100,000 in an experimental set up such as Neilson et al. (2018b) and
almost 900,000 in a quasi-experimental setup (Navarro-Sola, 2019).
Search Methods
The search for papers that make up the set of core studies was at the forefront
of the evidence-gathering process for this review. The first round of searches was
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Figure S1.2. Comparison Between Gains in Learning Reported and Cost-Benefit Ratio for
Interventions in “Access to Technology” Category
Notes: In order to display the full potential of each intervention, “learning gain” coded as the largest gain in any
field of learning, whether it is an academic subject like “math” or a less established area like “computer skills.” The
“SD gains in learning per USD 10” corresponds to the largest effect in any field of learning, divided by the per-pupil
spending in USD, divided by 10. Studies for which authors did not report enough information to standardize gains
into SD units are not in this plot. Studies denoted with a star (*) did not report enough cost information to obtain a
per-pupil estimate, and hence a cost-benefit ratio. Studies without confidence intervals did not report standard errors
in the results. Studies are sorted by whether they do not have cost information first, and then by the “Largest gain
in learning reported” bar. Note that figure S1.1 does not show Angrist and Lavy (2002) with a negative outcome,
as figures S1.1–S1.4 plot the largest gain in any subject measured. In the case of Angrist and Lavy (2002), they find
negative effects on math, and no effects on language, so the largest gain is the null result on language.
within repositories of peer-reviewed journals and databases such as EconLit, Econ-
Papers, and Google Scholar, where multiple combinations of words related to the
scope of this review4 were searched. Furthermore, I looked for the same terms in
the AEA Trial Registry for any trials that may have finished already. Next, I looked
in the working paper repositories of well-known organizations that routinely produce
education-related research as the World Bank, the Interamerican Development Bank,
the EdTech Hub, NBER, the RISE Programme, Annenberg Institute, J-PAL, and IPA. I
also used back- and forward tracing of citations from four highly cited and/or com-
prehensive papers: Muralidharan et al. (2019), Sampson et al. (2019), Escueta et al.
(2020), Evans and Mendez Acosta (2020), and World Bank (2018). After identify-
ing an initial set of papers through these methods, I forward-traced papers through
the literature review sections of these papers, and the papers that they cite. I then
4. The actual terms searched were “EdTech,” “ed-tech,” “Ed Tech,” “Technology education,” “Technology in education,” “ICT
in education,” “SMS education,” “Computers education,” “Laptops education,” “Technology instruction,” “Technology school” all by
themselves, and then combining them with “developing countries,” “Latin America,” “Africa,” “Sub-Saharan Africa,” and “India.”
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Figure S1.3. Comparison Between Gains in Learning Reported and Cost-Benefit Ratio for
Interventions in “Technology-Enabled Behavioral Interventions” Category
Notes: In order to display the full potential of each intervention, “learning gain” coded as the largest gain in any field
of learning, whether it is an academic subject like “math” or a less established area like “computer skills.” Studies
denoted with three stars (***) had such a high cost-effectiveness ratio that the bar was recoded as a 2 to ease the visual
interpretation of the other studies. In the case of Neilson et al. (2018a), the largest gain in learning corresponds to
6.7 SD per USD 10. The “SD gains in learning per USD 10” corresponds to the largest effect in any field of learning,
divided by the per-pupil spending in USD, divided by 10. Studies for which authors did not report enough information
to standardize gains into SD units are not in this plot. Studies denoted with a star (*) did not report enough cost
information to obtain a per-pupil estimate, and hence a cost-benefit ratio. Studies without confidence intervals did
not report standard errors in the results. Studies are sorted by whether they do not have cost information first, and
then by the “Largest gain in learning reported” bar.
backward-tracked, i.e., searched other papers that cited these studies, each of these
papers through the Google Scholar feature for this process (“Cited by”). After complet-
ing this process, I iterated through the process of back- and forward-tracing papers
until no additional papers were located. While there is no guarantee that all studies
that meet the four main criteria are included in the set of core studies, great lengths
were covered to ensure that the review was as extensive as possible.
Online Appendix: Summary Tables
a. Access to technology
b. Technology-enabled behavioral interventions
c. Improvements to instruction
d. Self-led learning
Rodriguez-Segura
1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Figure S1.4. Comparison Between Gains in Learning Reported and Cost-Benefit Ratio for
Interventions in “Improvements to Instruction” Category
Notes: In order to display the full potential of each intervention, “learning gain” coded as the largest gain in any field
of learning, whether it is an academic subject like “math” or a less established area like “computer skills.” Studies
denoted with three stars (***) had such a high cost-effectiveness ratio that the bar was recoded as a 2 to ease the
visual interpretation of the other studies. In the case of Naik et al. (2016), the largest gain in learning corresponds to
2.4 SD per USD 10. The “SD gains in learning per USD 10” corresponds to the largest effect in any field of learning,
divided by the per-pupil spending in USD, divided by 10. Studies for which authors did not report enough information
to standardize gains into SD units are not in this plot. Studies denoted with a star (*) did not report enough cost
information to obtain a per-pupil estimate, and hence a cost-benefit ratio. Studies without confidence intervals did
not report standard errors in the results. Studies are sorted by whether they do not have cost information first, and
then by the “Largest gain in learning reported” bar.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023

Figure S1.5. Comparison Between Gains in Learning Reported and Cost-Benefit Ratio for
Interventions in “Self-led Learning” Category
Notes: In order to display the full potential of each intervention, “learning gain” coded as the largest gain in any field
of learning, whether it is an academic subject like “math” or a less established area like “computer skills.” Studies
denoted with three stars (***) had such a high cost-effectiveness ratio that the bar was recoded as a 2 to ease the
visual interpretation of the other studies. In the case of Hirschleifer (2016), the largest gain in learning corresponds
to 2.2 SD per USD 10. The “SD gains in learning per USD 10” corresponds to the largest effect in any field of learning,
divided by the per-pupil spending in USD, divided by 10. Studies for which authors did not report enough information
to standardize gains into SD units are not in this plot. Studies denoted with a star (*) did not report enough cost
information to obtain a per-pupil estimate, and hence a cost-benefit ratio. Studies without confidence intervals did
not report standard errors in the results. Studies are sorted by whether they do not have cost information first, and
then by the “Largest gain in learning reported” bar.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/wbro/article/37/2/171/6333790 by World Bank user on 27 July 2023
