Munich Personal RePEc Archive
Experimental Evidence on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence in the Classroom
Ferman, Bruno and Lima, Lycia and Riva, Flavio
Sao Paulo School of Economics - FGV, Sao Paulo School of Business
Administration - FGV, Sao Paulo School of Business Administration
- FGV
4 November 2020
Online at https://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/103934/
MPRA Paper No. 103934, posted 05 Nov 2020 14:25 UTC

Experimental Evidence on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence in the Classroom∗
Bruno Ferman†
Lycia Lima‡
Flavio Riva§
First draft: November 4th, 2020
Abstract. This paper investigates how technologies that use diﬀerent combinations of artiﬁcial and human
intelligence are incorporated into classroom instruction, and how they ultimately aﬀect students’ outcomes.
We conducted a ﬁeld experiment to study two technologies that allow teachers to outsource grading and
feedback tasks on writing practices. The ﬁrst technology is a fully automated evaluation system that
provides instantaneous scores and feedback. The second one uses human graders as an additional resource
to enhance grading and feedback quality in aspects in which the automated system arguably falls short.
Both technologies signiﬁcantly improved students’ essay scores, and the additional inputs from human
graders did not improve eﬀectiveness. Furthermore, the technologies similarly helped teachers engage
more frequently on nonroutine tasks that supported the individualization of pedagogy. Our results are
informative about the potential of artiﬁcial intelligence to expand the set of tasks that can be automated,
and on how advances in artiﬁcial intelligence may relocate human labor to tasks that remain out of reach
of automation.
JEL Codes: I21, I25, I28, J22, J45.
∗The authors would like to acknowledge helpful comments from David Autor, Erich Battistin, Leonardo Bursztyn,
Guilherme Lichand, Cecilia Machado, Marcela Mello, V´ıtor Possebom, Jo˜ao Pugliese, Rodrigo Soares, Michel Szklo and
Thiago Tachibana that substantially improved earlier versions of this draft.
This project would not have been possible
without the collaborative eﬀorts of the Esp´ırito Santo’s Education Department (SEDU/ES). We also thank the Lemann
Foundation for supporting the implementation of the interventions; the staﬀat Oppen Social, and specially Ana Paula
Sampaio, Andressa Rosal´em, Camille Possatto and Elionai Rodrigues, for carefully implementing the teachers’ survey; the
Centro de Pol´ıticas P´ublicas e Avalia¸c˜ao da Educa¸c˜ao at Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora (CAEd/UFJF), and specially
Manuel Palacios and Mayra Moreira de Oliveira, for all the assistance with the implementation of the writing tests in public
schools in Esp´ırito Santo. Finally, we are deeply indebted to the implementer’s staﬀ, who made the design of the experiment
possible and helped us tirelessly in the various stages of this research. We gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support from
J-PAL through the Post-Primary Education Initiative, which allowed the collection of primary data from students and
teachers and the correction of the ENEM training essays and the biographical narratives. Maria Luiza Marques Abaurre
and Daniele Riva provided helpful guidance on the background information necessary to understand the grading criteria
for written essays and group them in the way we do in this paper. We uploaded a full pre-analysis plan at the American
Economic Association Social Science Registry (AEARCTR-0003729). This research was approved by the Committee on
the Use of Humans as Experimental Subjects (COUHES, Protocol #18115953228) at MIT and the ethics’ committee at
Funda¸c˜ao Getulio Vargas (FGV). The authors declare that they have no relevant material or ﬁnancial interests that relate
to the results described.
†Sao Paulo School of Economics — FGV, bruno.ferman@fgv.br, corresponding author.
‡Sao Paulo School of Business Administration — FGV, lycia.lima@fgv.br.
§Sao Paulo School of Business Administration — FGV, flaviorussoriva@gmail.com.

1
Introduction
The recent progresses in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) changed the terms of comparative advantage between
technology and human labor, shifting the limits of what can —and reviving the debate on what should—
be automated. In educational policy circles, in particular, the now broad scope of applications of
AI to linguistics prompted a controversy on automated writing evaluation (AWE) systems (see, for
instance, the Human Readers Petition).1 Central to the controversy on AWE is the ability of systems
that are “completely blind to meaning” to emulate human parsing, grading and feedback behavior.2
However, such controversy largely bypasses the fact that AWE may not be introduced in isolation.
Following the rationale from, for example, Acemoglu and Autor (2011), by performing routine tasks
previously thought to be out of reach from automation, AWE may induce a re-allocation of tasks
between technology and human labor. In this context, AWE systems may be eﬀective in improving
even skills in which AI alone arguably still falls short in evaluating.
Overall, from an economics
perspective, the relevant question should not be whether AWE systems are able to perfectly emulate
teacher’s feedback and grading behavior, but whether such systems, when incorporated into instruction,
can eﬀectively improve students’ outcomes.
This paper approaches these questions by investigating how educational technologies (ed techs)
that use diﬀerent combinations of artiﬁcial and human intelligence are incorporated into instruction,
and how they aﬀect students’ outcomes. We present the results of a randomized ﬁeld experiment
with 178 public schools and around 19,000 students in Brazil. The 110 treated schools incorporated
one of two ed techs designed to improve scores in the argumentative essay of the National Secondary
Education Exam (ENEM). These ed techs diﬀer in the way they combine artiﬁcial intelligence and
external human support in order to alleviate Language teachers’ time and human capital constraints.
Time constraints, in particular, tend to be more binding for Language teachers handling large written
essays such as the ENEM essay, which require time-intensive tasks (Grimes and Warschauer, 2010).
In post-primary education, given that instruction needs to contemplate relatively advanced topics,
teachers’ human capital is also likely a limitation to building writing skills (Banerjee et al., 2013).
Both ed techs rely, to some extent, on an AWE system embedded on an online platform with low
Internet requirements. The ﬁrst ed tech (“enhanced AWE”) uses the system’s ML score to instan-
taneously place students on a bar with ﬁve quality levels and to provide information on syntactic
text features, such as orthographic mistakes and the use of a conversational register (“writing as you
speak”). The system withholds the ML score and, about three days after submitting essays, students
receive a ﬁnal grading elaborated by human graders hired by the implementer. This grading includes
the ﬁnal ENEM essay score, comments on the skills valued in the exam and a personalized comment
1At its core, AWE uses: (i) natural language processing to extract syntactic, semantic and rhetorical features related
to essay quality, and (ii) machine learning (ML) algorithms to generate scores and allocate feedback based on these
features.
2The quoted expression is taken from McCurry (2012) (p. 155), who also presents a rich description of the controversy
on AWE. Essentially, critics argue that pure AWE systems cannot measure the essentials of good writing and might
make writing unnecessarily more proliﬁc by taking linguistic complexity for complexity of thought. The Human Readers
Petition provides further criticism on the use of machine scoring in high-stakes assessment calling upon schools to “STOP
using the regressive data generated by machine scoring of student essays to shape or inform instruction in the classroom”
and to “STOP buying automated essay scoring services or programs in the counter-educational goal of aligning responsible
classroom assessment with such irresponsible large-scale assessment”.
1

on essay quality. Overall, the main goal of incorporating additional inputs from humans is to enhance
grading and feedback quality on aspects in which AI may fall short. The second ed tech (“pure AWE”)
uses only AI to grade and provide feedback, without the participation of human graders. As in the
enhanced AWE treatment, students are placed on the quality bar and receive information on text
features right after submitting essays, but are also presented to the system’s predicted score and to a
suitable feedback selected from the implementers’ database.
There are several features of our setting that make it interesting to study AWE-based ed techs.
First, the essay grading criteria range from lower-level skills, such as the command over orthography,
to rather complex skills, such as the ability to interpret information and sustain a coherent point of
view. These tend to be the bulk of the skills considered in the evaluation of argumentative written
essays (Barkaoui and Knouzi, 2012; McCurry, 2012). Importantly, the criteria encompass both skills
for which pure AWE systems are arguably good at evaluating and skills that such systems would fall
short in capturing. Thus, one could expect the additional inputs from human graders to diﬀerentially
aﬀect diﬀerent types of skills that are evaluated in the exam. Second, ENEM is the second largest
college admission exam in the world, falling shortly behind the Chinese g¯aokˇao. In 2019, the year of
our study, roughly 5 million people and 70% of the total of high school seniors in the country took
the exam, which acts as a key determinant of access to higher education. This speaks to the potential
eﬀects of scaling up these ed techs which, at least for the pure AWE system, would be relatively low
cost. Finally, the gap in ENEM scores between public and private students is substantially larger for
the essay when compared to the other parts of the exam. Thus, in our context, both technologies could
make public school students more competitive for admission into post-secondary institutions.
The primary goal of the experiment was to describe and compare the eﬀects of both ed techs on
ENEM essay scores. We ﬁnd that the enhanced AWE improved scores in roughly 0.1σ. The total
eﬀect is channeled by improvements in all skills evaluated in the exam: (i) syntactic skills (0.07σ),
which comprise the command over the formal norm of written language and the skills that allow one
to build a logical structure connecting the various parts of the essay; (ii) analytical skills (0.04σ),
which comprise the skills necessary to present ideas that are related to the essay motivating elements
and develop arguments to convince the reader of a particular point of view; (iii) policy proposal skills
(0.16σ), which capture the ability of students to showcase critical-thinking by proposing a policy to
the social problem that ﬁgures, in each year, as the topic of the essay. Surprisingly, the point estimates
and coverage of conﬁdence intervals for the pure AWE ed tech are virtually the same. Therefore, we
ﬁnd evidence that the additional inputs from human graders did not improve the eﬀectiveness of the
ed techs to improve scores that capture a broad set of writing skills.3 Using the essay public-private
achievement gap to benchmark magnitudes, we ﬁnd that both ed techs mitigate 9% of the gap. In
the policy proposal score gap, which is currently at a high 80%, the eﬀects imply a reduction of 20%.
Since language’s most sensitive period of development happens before adolescence and tends to be less
responsive to variation in educational inputs (see Knudsen et al., 2006), we consider that these are
economically meaningful eﬀects. From a policy perspective, the fact that we ﬁnd no diﬀerential eﬀects
across arms bears relevance, as expanding the program without human graders is substantially simpler
and cheaper.
3In the estimation, we pooled information on both the oﬃcial ENEM 2019 exam and on an independently administered
essay with the same structure. The eﬀects are similar but less precisely estimated if we consider the two data sources
separately.
2

Using primary data on students, we ﬁnd that the ed techs improved the quantity of training and
feedback. Both treatments increased the perceived quality of the feedback, with stronger eﬀects for the
enhanced AWE ed tech. This is perhaps expected given the semantic nuances and the complexity of
most of the skills valued in the exam. Finally, we show that both technologies increased the number of
ENEM training essays students discussed with their teachers. If teachers completely delegated essays’
training to the ed tech, then we should expect that treatments would decrease the number of essays
students discussed with their teachers. In contrast, we ﬁnd evidence that both technologies helped
teachers engage more frequently on nonroutine tasks that support the individualization of pedagogy.
Despite the similar results on impacts and mechanisms —apart from the somewhat expected lever-
age in feedback quality that human participation entails—, we ﬁnd suggestive evidence that teachers
adapted diﬀerently to the introduction of the ed techs using teacher-level primary data. Teachers
using the enhanced AWE ed tech perceived themselves as less time-constrained to deliver the language
curriculum material, and adjusted hours worked from home downwards. Teachers in the pure AWE ed
tech arm were not impacted by the introduction of the ed tech in any of these margins. At face value,
these results suggest that teachers in the pure AWE treatment arm took over some of the work that
the the additional input of human graders provided in the enhanced treatment. However, we cannot
rule out that these diﬀerences were due to diﬀerential attrition in the teachers’ survey.
In addition to describing eﬀects on primary outcomes and mechanisms, we consider indirect eﬀects
of the ed techs on other learning topics. Speciﬁcally, we discuss whether our data are consistent with:
(i) positive or negative spill-overs to the narrative textual genre, which could come, for instance, from
improvements in skills that are common to all genres (like orthography) or from adverse eﬀects of
“training to the test”; (ii) positive or negative eﬀects on subjects related to Language, which could
arise from complementarities with writing skills or increases in motivation to take the ENEM essay;
(iii) positive or negative eﬀects on subjects unrelated to Language (such as Mathematics), which could
arise, once again, from an increase in motivation or a crowding out in eﬀort due to an increase in essays’
training. Across all families of learning subjects, we ﬁnd statistically insigniﬁcant results. Since we
pool several sources of data, we are able to reject even small adverse eﬀects in each of these families
of outcomes, suggesting that the eﬀects of the ed techs were restricted to their main goal of improving
ENEM essay scores.
These ﬁndings add to a growing literature on ed techs and on the eﬀects of technology on instruction.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst impact evaluation of a pure AWE system — a learning
tool widely used in the US (McCurry, 2012) — that uses a credible research design and a large sample
to illustrate how these technologies are incorporated into instruction and aﬀect students’ outcomes.4
More broadly, in face of the somewhat mixed evidence of the ed tech literature (Bulman and Fairlie,
4In particular, we are not aware of any impact evaluation that does so in a post-primary education context. Out-
side post-primary education, Shermis et al. (2008), Palermo and Thomson (2018) and Wilson and Roscoe (2019) use
experimental data on grades 6-10. However, we believe there are important limitations in the results presented in these
papers. First, the main outcomes in Shermis et al. (2008) and Palermo and Thomson (2018) are variables generated by
the automated systems system, which will introduce severe measurement error in skills if treated students have higher
ability to game the system in order to receive better scores. Second, in both papers randomization was conducted at the
individual level, which has important implications on the way the AWE systems are integrated into instruction and raises
serious concerns about spill-overs. Most outcomes in this literature are also not economically important. Wilson and
Roscoe (2019) present an evaluation of the eﬀects Project Essay Grade Writing in Texas on the state English Language
Arts test but treatment was randomized using a very small sample of clusters (3 teachers in 10 diﬀerent classrooms) and
the control group received a recommendation of using Google Docs as an alternative resource.
3

2016), Muralidharan et al. (2019) argue that “realizing the potential of technology-aided instruction
to improve education will require paying careful attention to the details of the speciﬁc intervention,
and the extent to which it alleviates binding constraints to learning”. The ed techs we analyze were
designed to alleviate important binding constraints in our setting — most importantly, time and human
capital constraints—, and feature most of the promising channels of impact of ed techs discussed by
Muralidharan et al. (2019).5
The positive eﬀects we ﬁnd, and a detailed analysis of mechanisms,
corroborate and illustrate the conclusion from Muralidharan et al. (2019).
Finally, a comparison
between the two treatment arms provides evidence that teachers’ human capital was not a binding
constraint for the implementation of the pure AWE technology, as we found no evidence that the
additional inputs from human graders improved the eﬀectiveness of the program.6
This is also an
important result from a policy perspective, as scaling up an ed tech like the enhanced treatment would
necessarily entail large marginal hiring and monitoring costs.
Our attempt to understand the eﬀects of the programs on teachers’ time allocation also connects
our contributions to the literature on the eﬀects of technological change on the labor market. In a
seminal paper, Autor et al. (2003) argue that computer-based technologies substitute human labor in
routine tasks —i.e., those that can be expressed in systematic rules and performed by automates— and
complement human labor in nonroutine abstract tasks (also, see Acemoglu and Autor, 2011). AWE
systems added marking essays with a focus on syntax and identifying linguistic structures to the ever
expanding set of routine tasks. The question of whether AI will eventually be able to interpret written
content remains, to this day, speculative. Despite such limitation, both ed techs reduced the burden of
routine tasks, and shifted teachers’ classroom activities toward nonroutine tasks: personalized discus-
sions on essay quality.7 In a sense, we ﬁnd contextual support and one of the ﬁrst pieces of evidence
for the optimistic prediction that “AI [...] will serve as a catalyst for the transformation of the role
of the teacher [...] allow[ing] teachers to devote more of their energies to the creative and very human
acts that provide the ingenuity and empathy to take learning to the next level. ” (Luckin et al., 2016,
p. 31).
Finally, we contribute to the small set of papers that take writing skills as outcomes of interest.
While there is a large number of papers in the ed tech literature (and educational programs, more
generally) that use Language and Mathematics multiple-choice test scores, research eﬀorts are much
5On ed techs’ mechanisms in general, the authors posit that“[a] non-exhaustive list of posited channels of impact [of ed-
techs] include using technology to consistently deliver high-quality content that may circumvent limitations in teachers’ own
knowledge; delivering engaging (often game-based) interactive that may improve student attention; delivering individually
customized content for students; reducing the lag between students attempting a problem and receiving feedback; and,
analyzing patterns of student errors to precisely target content to clarify speciﬁc areas of misunderstanding.” (p. 1427,
fn. 1, our emphasis). Most of the listed features are essential and ever improving features of AI-based ed techs. Thus,
besides presenting credible evidence on the eﬀects of AWE systems on students, our results illustrate general mechanisms
that make AI promising to support teachers in tasks to foster skills.
6Given our research design, it is not possible to distinguish whether (i) the AWE system needs to be complemented
by human intelligence and school teachers played this role in the pure AWE program, or (ii) the AWE system would have
been eﬀective regardless of teachers’ inputs. Given our evidence that teachers did not completely delegate instructions,
and actually increased the amount of pedagogy individualization, we believe alternative (i) is more likely.
7While concluding something about the educational production function would require a design that exogenously
varies the amount of inputs from ed techs conditional on it’s implementation (such as in Bettinger et al., 2020), the
results we ﬁnd are inconsistent with complete substitution.
4

rarer for writing skills.8 This is perhaps surprising, considering the ubiquity of tasks that demand
writing skills in universities and in the labor market.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides background information on
the experiment’s setting and on the ed techs we study. Section 3 describes some anticipated mechanisms
we speciﬁed in the pre-analysis plan and which guided our data collection. Section 4 discusses the
research design and its validity, along with the data and the main econometric speciﬁcations. Section
5 presents the main ﬁndings. Section 6 concludes the paper.
2
Context and Experimental Arms
2.1
Background
2.1.1.
ENEM. The National Secondary Education Exam (“Exame Nacional do Ensino M´edio”,
ENEM) is a non-compulsory standardized high-stakes exam that acts as a key determinant of ac-
cess to higher education in Brazil. The exam is currently composed of 180 multiple-choice questions,
equally divided into four areas of knowledge (Mathematics, Natural Sciences, Language and Codes,
Human Sciences), and one written essay. The large gap between public and private schools’ quality
in Brazil is salient in all ENEM tests and, in particular, in the essay. The upper graph in Figure 1
describes the private school premium using data on the universe of high school seniors in ENEM 2018.
Although the achievement gap is a signiﬁcant feature of all parts of the exam, it is remarkably larger
in the written essay (at 43%) when compared with the multiple-choice tests (at 13-21%). When com-
pared to the multiple-choice Portuguese Language test, which measures other dimensions of literacy,
the gap in the essay is more than three orders of magnitude larger. The contribution of the essay to
the total achievement gap is 39%, compared to 21% and 12% in multiple-choice tests in Mathemat-
ics and Language, respectively. All these facts highlight the importance of policy interventions that
may aﬀect ENEM essay scores and make public school students more competitive for admission into
post-secondary institutions.
2.1.2. ENEM Argumentative Essay. The main topic of the essay varies from year to year and is
always introduced by excerpts, graphs, ﬁgures or cartoons that frame an important social issue. Since
its creation, ENEM has proposed several polemic topics, which typically attract broad attention from
the media: for example, the use of Internet data to manipulate consumers (2018), gender-based violence
(2015), the limits between public and private behavior in the 21st century (2011), the importance of
labor for human dignity (2010), how to stop the Amazon deforestation (2008) and child labor (2005).
In 2019, the year of our study, the topic of the oﬃcial ENEM 2019 essay was “Democratization
of Access to Cinema in Brazil”.
The ﬁrst motivating element described a public exhibition of a
8To the best of our knowledge, research on the topic has been restricted to early childhood and preschool interventions,
settings where the measurement of these skills is obviously conducted at a very basic level.
Some examples are the
READY4K! text messaging program for parents (York and Loeb, 2014; Doss et al., 2018) and the well-known center-
based early childhood education program Head Start (Puma et al., 2005). York and Loeb (2014) and Doss et al. (2018)
measure writing skills as the ability of writing one’s name and upper-case letter knowledge and Puma et al. (2005) uses
the ability to write letters. In a comprehensive review of experimental research on interventions to improve learning at
later ages, Fryer (2017) describes several experiments (Morrow, 1992; Pinnell et al., 1994; Mooney, 2003; Borman et al.,
2008; Somers et al., 2010; Kim et al., 2011; Jones et al., 2011, among others) with treatments directly aimed at improving
writing skills, but the outcomes evaluated are almost exclusively reading test scores.
5

movie in 1895 and the skepticism of Lumi`ere on the potential of cinema for large-scale entertainment.
The second one presented a deﬁnition of cinema as a “mirror-machine”, elaborated by the French
philosopher and sociologist Edgar Morin. The third one described how the last years in Brazil have
witnessed a secular concentration of the movie theaters in large urban centers. Finally, the fourth and
last motivating element was an info-graph presenting statistics on movie consumption on television and
movie theaters. At the top of the page, as in every year since the creation of ENEM in 1998, students
were instructed to write an essay following the argumentative textual genre using the motivating
elements as a start point and mobilizing knowledge acquired during their formation period. We now
discuss how the oﬃcial graders attribute scores to students facing this task.
Measurement System for Writing Skills. A successful handwritten essay begins with an introductory
paragraph, followed by two paragraphs with arguments that underlie a point of view or thesis on
the social problem and a ﬁnal paragraph featuring a policy proposal. The ﬁve writing competencies
(INEP/MEC, 2019) evaluated by graders of the ENEM essay are:
• syntactic skills, which comprise:
– exhibiting command of the formal written norm of Brazilian Portuguese [200 points];
– exhibiting knowledge of the linguistic mechanisms that lead to the construction of the ar-
gument [200 points];
• analytic skills, which comprise:
– understanding the proposed topic and applying concepts from diﬀerent areas of knowledge
to develop the argument following the structural limits of the dissertative-argumentative
prose [200 points];
– selecting, relating, organizing and interpreting information, facts, opinions and arguments
in defense of a point of view, using pieces of knowledge acquired in the motivating elements
and during the schooling [200 points];
• critical-thinking and policy proposal, which comprise:
– elaborating a policy proposal that could contribute to solve the problem in question, re-
specting basic human rights [200 points];
Each of the ﬁve competencies is valued by graders on a 200 points scale with intervals of 40 so that
the full score ranges from 0 to 1000.
As speciﬁed in the pre-analysis plan, we study these ﬁve competencies aggregating them into these
three diﬀerent categories, which we refer to as skills hereafter. The ﬁrst competency is the command
over the formal norm of the written language, which comprises, among other things, the precise use of
vocabulary, correct orthography, verbal concordance and the use of the neutral register — as opposed
to the informal of “conversational” register typical of oral or intimate communication. The second
competency relates to the student’s ability to build a logical and formal structure connecting the various
parts of the essay. Students are thus evaluated in terms of their capacity of establishing relations using
prepositions, conjunctions and adverbs building a “ﬂuid” text within and across paragraphs. Jointly
considered, these two competencies characterize the “surface” (INEP/MEC, 2019, p. 21) of the text
6

or aspects that linguists call syntactic. The next two competencies, on the other hand, are directly
related to the meaning conveyed by the student essay. They require that test takers present ideas that
are related to the essay topic and develop arguments in order to convince the reader of a particular
point of view, displaying a set of analytical skills. These beneﬁt not only students that “write well”
but also students that have a more solid educational background and can leverage potential synergies
with other topics covered in the post-primary education curriculum. Finally, the ﬁfth and last writing
skill evaluated is the ability of students to showcase critical and practical-thinking by elaborating a
policy proposal in response to the point of view presented. While the grouping is based on our own
interpretation of the grading criteria, it was motivated by interactions with the implementers’ staﬀand
by our reading of the specialized literature on writing assessments in Brazil and elsewhere (specially
Abaurre and Abaurre, 2012; Neumann, 2012).
The private school premium helps validate the way we chose to group competencies. Above, we high-
lighted that diﬀerences in the essay score account for the largest share of the public-private achievement
gap in ENEM. The bottom graph in Figure 1 break down this premium for each of the competencies
and skills presented above. Notably, the gap seems to be increasing in the skill complexity or sophis-
tication, starting at 23-30% for the syntactic aspects of the text (similar to Mathematics), reaching
roughly 50% and a large 80% for the analytic skills and the policy proposal, respectively.9
ENEM Essay Grading. The graders hired by the Ministry of Education are bachelor degrees in areas
related to Language and personally correct the digitized version of the handwritten essays using an
online platform. Training happens a couple of months before the test and consists nowadays of a
two-day course where the writing skills and the grading criteria are discussed and speciﬁc examples on
how to use the writing rubric on a set of excerpts are presented. In the ﬁrst step, each essay is graded
by two diﬀerent persons. If the two grades disagree on more than 100 points in total or on more than
80 points on at least one skill, a third grader with high agreement rates is assigned automatically and
grades the essay. If the third grader agrees (in the sense described above) with at least one of the two
initial graders, the ﬁnal score is the simple average between the two closest scores given to the written
essay. If the disagreement is not solved with the participation of a third-party, the essay is sent to a
board of experienced graders which meet to correct these essays in person.
2.2
Treatment Arms
The implementer of the ed techs was created in 2015 and its main goal is to improve writing and address
the “literacy gap” in Brazil. The main current product is an ed tech based on an online platform that
corrects and provides feedback on ENEM written essays using an AWE system (Fonseca et al., 2018)
supervised by independently hired human graders. The next paragraphs describe the main current ed
tech developed by the implementer (hereafter, enhanced AWE ed tech) and an alternative treatment
that removes human graders from the algorithm supervision tasks, letting the artiﬁcial intelligence “do
all the work” at once (hereafter, pure AWE ed tech).
2.2.1. Enhanced AWE ed tech. Even though access to the online platform can be done indepen-
9The correlation between scores in competencies also help us validate our grouping of competencies. In ENEM 2018,
the correlation between scores in the ﬁrst two skills is very large (0.82), as is the one between the next two (0.94). In
interactions with the implementer’s staﬀ, we learned that one of the their priors is that these skills are jointly developed
in the formation of writing skills.
7

dently by students outside the school, the implementer tries to provide teachers with an instrument
to support the development of writing skills inside the classroom. The program spans the academic
year of high school seniors and consists of ﬁve ENEM writing practices elaborated by the implementer.
The integration of these writing practices to the other activities in the Portuguese Language course is
discretionary, but essays are scheduled to happen in predeﬁned time intervals. In 2019, the topics of
the ENEM practice essays, in order of appearance, were:
• The Challenges of Integrating Technology with Instruction in Brazilian Schools;
• Communication in the Internet Era: Freedom or Intolerance;
• The Challenges of Current Work Conditions in Brazil;
• The Escape from Hunger and Famine in Brazil;
• Art and Culture for Social Transformation.10
Students’ Interface. During a practice, the platform saves essays automatically and frequently to pre-
vent students from missing their work upon problems with the computers or the Internet connection.
After the submission, the platform interacts instantaneously with the student providing a compre-
hensive set of text features used to compare the essay to “goals” that would bring the student closer
to achieve a perfect score. Some examples are: number of words, number of spelling mistakes and
uses of informality tones, intervention elements and social agent markers. This immediate screening
of the text also allows for a quick test of plagiarism and the student is advised to work on her text by
studying with the help of online materials that are elaborated internally. At this point, the student
is also presented to a signal of achievement based on the AWE predicted essay score, displayed in a
performance bar with 5 levels.
Human Graders. The enhanced program withholds the AWE predicted score and provides students
with a rough approximation thereof to avoid introducing noise in the evaluation process. The ﬁnal
score shown to students is set by human graders independently hired on a task-based contract that
pays 3.50 Reais (approximately 2019 US 0.85 dollars) per essay. The graders have access to the essay
with all the information on text features shown to students and choose a value, ranging from 0 to 200
(in 40 point intervals) without seeing the grade predicted by the ML algorithm. When a human grader
chooses a score for a skill, their interface suggests a randomly chosen comment taken from a database
of textual interactions chosen by the implementer, which are pre-adapted to the quality of a student in
a given skill. The essay can also be personally annotated and the comments’ colors are associated with
each of the exam’s skills. Finally, the human graders must leave a general comment on the essay, the
last step before submitting the ﬁnal grading back to students. The whole process takes, on average,
three business days. To boost engagement students receive a text message when their ﬁnal grading is
available in the platform.
Teachers’ Interface. During a writing activity, the ongoing essays are presented along with a progress
bar, where teachers can follow the progress of students on the writing task and monitor if they have
10Since, by chance, there was some similarity between the topic of the last writing practice and the topic of the 2019
ENEM essay, in Section 5 we will discuss the potential direct inﬂuences that these writing topics may have exerted on
the performance of students.
8

logged in, started writing and ﬁnished the task. The system also shows descriptive statistics on common
grammar mistakes made by students in real time. Each teacher also has access to a personal dashboard
with shortcuts to Excel ﬁles containing the aggregate data on enrolled students and their individual
scores on the essay and skills for a given activity. Teachers also have access to the full individual essay
gradings and are absolutely free to base or not their students’ scores on Portuguese Language on one
or several of the outputs of the platform.
2.2.2. Pure AWE ed tech. In this treatment arm, the user experience is fully based on the instan-
taneous outputs from the AWE system. Thus, this ed tech explores the possibility that a pedagogical
program could be based only on information that is generated by the artiﬁcial intelligence and is cur-
rently withheld for a supervision step. The students’ and teachers’ interface are very similar to the
one in the enhanced program, but as students submit their essays, they are presented instantaneously
to the full essay score predicted by the algorithm and to comments on each skill, randomly selected
in the implementers’ database conditional on each predicted skill score. The interest in testing the
eﬀectiveness of the pure AWE treatment was twofold. First, currently, expanding the program entails
large marginal hiring and monitoring costs of human graders. Second, the implementer knows that
a signiﬁcant share of students do not come back for their ﬁnal grading, so there is value in gauging
the net eﬀects of reducing the lag between students attempting a writing task and receiving formative
feedback even if this feedback is of arguably lower quality.
3
Hypotheses and Mechanisms
The ed techs described in Section 2 aim to change the nature of part of writing instruction and to
provide students with oriented opportunities of practicing for the ENEM essay. We now discuss the
main hypotheses of the experiment and the mechanisms by which we anticipated the ed techs would
aﬀect students’ outcomes.11
3.1
Main Hypotheses
As speciﬁed in the pre-analysis plan, our main hypotheses relate to whether the ed techs aﬀect ENEM
essay scores. This is an important outcome for public school students, as ENEM is a key mediator of
access into college and the essay is responsible for the greatest share of the public-private achievement
gap in the exam (Figure 1). Moreover, since this gap is unevenly distributed across writing skills and
seem to be increasing in how sophisticated they are, we were also interested in the eﬀects of the ed
techs on scores on skills that add up to the total essay score. We test the following hypotheses:
H1
a : The enhanced AWE ed tech has an eﬀect diﬀerent from zero on ENEM essay scores.
H2
a : The pure AWE ed tech has an eﬀect diﬀerent from zero on ENEM essay scores.
H3
a : The ed techs have diﬀerent eﬀects on ENEM essay scores.
11Whenever possible, we frame such mechanisms by referencing to promising features highlighted by the recent ed tech
literature (see the literature review in Muralidharan et al., 2019, and, specially, fn. 1) and, more broadly, by the literature
on educational policy.
9

As we discuss below, while our priors were that the main eﬀects would be positive, we could not
a priori rule out that the ed techs would have had adverse impacts on students. We also predicted
mechanisms that would favor either the pure or the enhanced AWE ed techs. Therefore, we also had
no priors on whether the diﬀerential eﬀects of the two ed techs would be positive or negative.
3.2
Potential Mechanisms
3.2.1. Training and Feedback. The ﬁrst channels of impact we anticipated are changes on the
quantity of training and the quantity/quality of feedback provided to students.
First, as they reduce the time spent preparing and grading ENEM essay practices, the ed techs
may help circumvent important time constraints faced by Language teachers and increase the number
of essays assigned. The new inputs from the ed techs could, however, crowd out one by one the essays
teachers would assign themselves, or even reduce the total number of essays written if teachers and
students take more time to conclude a writing activity using the platform. The latter possibility could
arise if there are major constraints on the capacity of schools to provide access to computers and an
adequate Internet connection. For a discussion on the importance of these issues in the implementation
of ed-tech programs in primary public schools in Brazil, see Ferman et al. (2019). Anticipating this
potential bottleneck, the technology was developed so that the Internet requirements for using the
platform are intentionally low.
Second, the two programs may aﬀect the quality of the feedback. It is not a priori obvious whether
the feedback would be better than the feedback students would receive from teachers in the absence
of the programs. Importantly, whether they would improve quality should depend crucially on how
teachers interact with the platform, and how traditional instructional tasks are re-distributed to the
AWE systems and, in the enhanced AWE system, to human graders.12 More speciﬁcally, it is possible,
for example, that teachers’ feedback for more complex skills would be better than the one provided
by the pure AWE ed tech alone. However, it may be that teachers compensate the shortcoming of a
pure AWE system, especially if their time constraints become less binding due to the AWE feedback.
Overall, we anticipated that the enhanced AWE ed tech should provide better feedback relative to the
pure AWE ed tech, particularly for more complex skills. However, the extent of such diﬀerences, and the
diﬀerences relative to the control group, depend crucially on how these technologies are incorporated
in the school.
Third, the ed techs could put teachers in a better position so as to engage in personal interactions
with their students focusing on more complex aspects of essays.13 Finally, the programs may aﬀect the
timing of the feedback. In this case, the pure AWE ed tech would have an advantage, as it provides
instantaneous feedback to students. As stated by Muralidharan et al. (2019), this is an important
potential advantage of ed techs.
12In particular, teachers could feel uncertain and end up not outsourcing some of their usual tasks to automated systems
and/or to human graders they don’t know personally. In other words, one could not rule out from start that we would
face very low levels of compliance in the ﬁeld. This seemed particularly relevant in the pure AWE treatment arm, which
the school’s staﬀmay not understand, trust or, even worse, fear.
13Following Autor et al. (2003), we framed this anticipated mechanism as a complementarity between the system’s
parsing and grading tasks and teacher’s nonroutine analytical (interpretation) and interactive tasks (providing in-person
individualized advice). In sum, we hypothesized that the ed techs could support the individualization of pedagogy. Notice,
however, that the ed techs could lead to a complete delegation of tasks to the new inputs, and even more if students use
the enhanced AWE.
10

3.2.2.
Teachers’ Time Allocation.
By altering traditional writing instruction, the treatments
may change teachers’ time allocation to diﬀerent sets of tasks inside and outside the classroom. In
particular, since the technologies allow teachers to outsource routine tasks of essay parsing and grading
of syntactic features, they might induce a re-allocation of work time towards nonroutine tasks (such as
preparing classes, correcting other homework or providing one-to-one tutoring). However, the freed up
time outside the classroom may only be compensated by adjustments in extra-hours worked outside
schools, which are common for Language teachers in our setting. Apart from changing time allocation
to diﬀerent tasks, the technologies could also alleviate teachers’ feelings on being time constrained.
Both sets of changes (behavioral and psychological) could end up aﬀecting teachers’ ability to help
students improve ENEM essay scores.
3.2.3. Expectations and Aspirations. The integration of the ed techs may also aﬀect teachers’
expectations about their students’ educational prospects and shift students’ aspirations towards aca-
demic tracks after leaving high school. Both sets of changes, in turn, may aﬀect teachers’ instructional
eﬀorts and/or students’ training eﬀort for ENEM essay and other parts of the exam. First, teachers
may consider that the ed techs are, indeed, working. As discussed in detail in our section on results,
this is consistent with the fact that almost the entirety of teachers complied with the treatments in
all activities. Second, over the year, teachers and students receive diﬀerent information about writing
quality than they would receive in the absence of the ed techs.
3.2.4. Knowledge About Students. The online platform provides teachers with summary statistics
on their students (mainly, average score and evolution in each activity and skill) and with gradings
on individual essays.
If this information is a better or more engaging approximation to the real
quality of essays than the one they would acquire themselves over time, the ed techs will accurately
update teachers’ beliefs about the “average” student, while at the same time highlighting important
heterogeneities across students. The former process could aﬀect the optimal targeting level of collective
instruction (Duﬂo et al., 2011) and/or help teachers address the problem of facing various levels of
writing quality.14 Finally, improved knowledge about students may trigger important synergies between
the content in classrooms dedicated directly to Grammar and Literature, generating positive spill-overs
on other aspects of language more commonly captured in multiple-choice tests.
Overall, while some of the anticipated changes are consistent with the ed techs leading to improvements
in ENEM essay scores (H1
a and H2
a), one cannot rule out that they wouldn’t be able to do so. Also,
given the large diﬀerences in structure between ed techs discussed above, we didn’t have strong priors
on the the sign of diﬀerential eﬀects (H3
a). For these reasons, we worked with two-sided hypothesis
tests in our analysis of primary outcomes.
3.3
Secondary Hypotheses
While our primary goal was to estimate the eﬀects of the ed techs on ENEM essay scores and to
identify their most important channels of impact, we also considered that they could have positive or
negative spill-over eﬀects on a broader set of outcomes. More speciﬁcally, we also test:
14We ﬁnd support for the fact that the latter process may be very important in the case of writing: not only the variance
of the distribution of ENEM essays in 2019 is two to three larger than the dispersion of multiple-choice Portuguese exam,
the dispersion of residuals of performance in ENEM 2008 after absorbing school ﬁxed eﬀects.
11

H4
a : The ed techs have an eﬀect diﬀerent from zero on scores capturing writing skills in other textual
genres.
H5
a : The ed techs have an eﬀect diﬀerent from zero on scores in topics related to literacy.
H6
a : The ed techs have an eﬀect diﬀerent from zero on scores in topics not related to literacy.
Once again, there are reasons why one may ﬁnd that the eﬀects in each family of outcomes are
ambiguous. First, we consider eﬀects on writing scores or skills in other textual genres (H4
a). On
the one hand, when training for the ENEM essay, students may practice more writing and receive
more feedback generating spill overs. This would arguably be more important in the ones that are
not genre-speciﬁc, such as the command over the formal written norm, and less so in the ones that
are genre-speciﬁc. On the other hand, treatments may hinder the development of these skills if the
feedback the ed techs provide is too speciﬁc for the ENEM essay and students end up “training to
the test” and worsening their performance in diﬀerent writing tasks. Considering this possibility is
important both from a general perspective, but also because diﬀerent textual genders are used by other
post-secondary institutions as criteria to admit students.
It is also diﬃcult to pin down the eﬀects on language-related or non-related skills and test scores,
such as Mathematics and Language (H5
a and H6
a). On the one hand, the ed techs may crowd out
time and eﬀort used to study other subjects inside and outside the classroom. On the other hand,
improvements in writing skills may be complementary to other subjects, like reading, which could
possibly reﬂect in multiple-choice Language scores. For language (non-writing) skills, the program can
also positively aﬀect students’ scores if it allows Portuguese teachers to better allocate their time to
teaching other subjects, such as Grammar.
4
Research Design
This section describes our research design, emphasizing aspects that allow us to draw conclusions
using the experimental data. We also discuss how we measured outcomes and gauged the mechanisms
discussed in the last paragraphs and the main econometric speciﬁcations used in the analysis of results.
4.1
Sample Selection and Assignment Mechanism
4.1.1. School Sample. In March 2019, we received a list of public schools in Esp´ırito Santo selected
to participate in the experiment by the State’s Education Department (“Secretaria de Estado da
Educa¸c˜ao”, SEDU/ES). At that point, we learnt that the selection of schools used information from
a 2017 survey on proneness to online technology adaptation. These schools received 8,000 notebooks
between February and April of 2019 to ascertain that computer availability would not be a ﬁrst-order
concern for the implementation of the ed techs. Importantly, schools received notebooks regardless of
treatment status.
Columns 1 to 3 in Appendix Table A.1 present comparisons between the universe of schools in
Esp´ırito Santo and the experimental sample of schools.
As expected, considering the technology
requirements used to build the experiment list, we ﬁnd that 93% of schools in our sample have access
to broadband Internet, against 80% in the whole state. In the microdata from the 2018 ENEM essay,
12

students in our sample also have slightly higher test scores.15 All these characteristics are consistent
with an important diﬀerence: there is only one rural school in our sample, while rural schools comprise
around 7% of schools in Esp´ırito Santo.
While the list of schools was not constructed to be representative, it comprises 68% of the urban
public schools and around 84% of the students in urban public schools of the state. Therefore, we
see our school sample as a good approximation to the population of urban school students in Esp´ırito
Santo.
4.1.2. Randomization. The ﬁnal number of treated units in the ﬁrst arm of experiment was chosen
based on constraints in the implementer capacity of providing the enhanced AWE ed tech to more
than 55 schools in 2019. The randomization used the following strata: (i) a geographical criterion,
the 11 regional administrative units in the Esp´ırito Santo state; (ii) the average score in the ENEM
2017 essay;16 (iii) participation on an implementation pilot in 2018.17 We used the median or quartiles
of the average score in ENEM 2017 to split schools within an administrative unit and generated an
independent stratum for the 6 schools that had no students taking the 2017 ENEM test.
The whole process of sample selection and randomization led to a total study sample size of 178 schools
divided in 33 strata (of sizes 2 to 8), with 110 schools equally divided in treatment arms and 68 schools
assigned to the control group.
4.2
Data
4.2.1. Primary Outcome: ENEM Essay Scores. To study our primary outcome of interest, we
use de-identiﬁed administrative microdata on the 2019 ENEM essay scores. In addition, we partnered
with the state’s educational authority to collect an essay with the same textual genre and grading
criteria of ENEM. One of Brazil’s leading education testing ﬁrms (“Centro de Pol´ıticas P´ublicas e
Avalia¸c˜ao da Educa¸c˜ao”, CAEd/UFJF) elaborated the proposal and graded the essays. Such essay
was an additional part of the state’s standardized exam, and was presented to teachers and students
as an initiative of the state called Writing Day, not related to the experiment. As an incentive for
students, all teachers in Esp´ırito Santo were instructed to use the grade in this essay as a share of the
ﬁnal grade in Portuguese Language (8%). Hereafter, we refer to this set of primary data as “nonoﬃcial”
ENEM essay.18
The decision to collect the complementary data was based on several reasons. First, due to recent
changes in the political landscape of Brazil and the dismantlement of part of the leadership of the
15Interestingly, we ﬁnd much smaller diﬀerences in the policy proposal scores which is the most sophisticated writing
skill captured by the ENEM essay scores.
16Information on the ENEM 2018 exam was not available at the time of the randomization.
17Only 5 schools in our sample were part of this pilot, which happened in the two last months of the second semester
of 2018 (two writing activities). Our main intention was to understand better the behavior of the pure AWE ed tech and
check whether it could sustain engagement over time. We created one independent stratum for these schools and kept
their random treatment assignments. This decision was taken jointly with the implementer and SEDU/ES to minimize
transitions that would lead to dissatisfaction among treated schools and awareness about the experiment.
18The topic of the essay was “The Construction of a National Brazilian Identity for the Portuguese Language”. The
ﬁrst motivating text described spoken language as a cultural phenomena that dynamically builds the identity of a nation.
The second one presented an argument from a Brazilian linguist in favor of the recognition of Brazilian Portuguese as a
distinct language from the Portuguese spoken in Portugal. Some diﬀerences between the two languages are illustrated in
the third motivating element. Finally, the fourth and last motivating element brieﬂy argued that knowing how to write
is an essential part of the civic duties of individuals.
13

autarchy in charge of the exam, we believed that there was a chance that microdata from the exam
would not be available for research purposes. Second, we thought it was important to have at least some
control over the theme of one of the essays, to guarantee that (by chance) students in the treatment
group would not have better scores simply by writing about a topic that they had just trained in
one of the program-related writing practices. This turned out to be important, as we discuss while
presenting our main results. Third, we anticipated that we would be able to include better individual-
level controls in the related regressions because, for these data, we can match students’ outcomes with
more controls that are highly predictive of achievement (such as the Portuguese Language multiple-
choice scores in the state’s standardized exams). Finally, we anticipated that participation in the ed
techs could lead some students to enroll in ENEM, generating diﬀerential attrition. As discussed in
the pre-analysis plan, following Ferman and Ponczek (2017), we pre-speciﬁed the following strategy in
case we found signiﬁcant diﬀerential attrition for at least one dataset: if considering both datasets led
to larger conﬁdence sets while using bounds to account for diﬀerential attrition, we would focus on the
results from the data with less attrition problems, and present the results with the other data in the
appendix.
4.2.2. Mechanisms. In order to provide a rich understanding of the channels of impact of both
ed techs and try to explain potential diﬀerences in treatment eﬀects, we collected primary data on
students and teachers at the end of 2019. We partnered with state’s educational authority and included
multiple-choice questions in the state’s standardized exam (“Programa de Avalia¸c˜ao da Educa¸c˜ao
B´asica do Esp´ırito Santo”, PAEBES) questionnaire, which happened three weeks before ENEM and
independently collected data through phone surveys with teachers in November and December (after
ENEM).
Training and Feedback.
For students, the variables collected on training, individual feedback and
interactions with their teachers were: (s.i) the number of essays written to train for the ENEM in 2019;
(s.ii) the number of ENEM essays that received individualized comments and/or annotations; (s.iii)
their perception on the usefulness of the comments and/or annotations —not useful at all, somewhat
useful, very useful; (s.iv) the number of essays that received a grade; (s.v) the number of essays graded
that were followed by a personal discussion with the teacher. All student variables were top-coded
at 10. The variables on essay assignment and collective feedback behavior of teachers during 2019
were: (t.i) number of essays assigned to train for the ENEM; (t.ii) number of essays assigned inside
the classroom; (t.iii) number of essays graded; (t.iv) number of essays assigned that were followed by a
discussion about common mistakes; (t.v) number of essays assigned that were followed by a discussion
about good writing patterns. Most of the questions of the teacher survey were open-ended so they
tend to provide very large and implausible values for some individuals. As speciﬁed in the pre-analysis
plan, we winsorize these data at the top 1% and, for our main results, we also investigate whether this
choice of winsorizing parameter is relevant.
Teachers’ Time Allocation. We asked teachers about their perceptions on the the time available during
the year to improve students’ knowledge on each subject of the high school senior year curricula using
a Likert Scale, where 1 meant “Time is very insuﬃcient” and 5 meant “Time is more than suﬃcient”.
We also asked the number of hours in a typical week allocated to: (i) marking essays, (ii) correcting
classwork and homework related to Grammar or Literature, (iii) preparing lectures and materials for
14

activities, including home assignments, (iv) giving individual support to students (one-on-one tutoring),
guiding and counseling those with academic problems or special interests, and (v) extra-hours of work
(inside or outside schools).19
Teachers’ Expectations and Students’ Aspirations. We pre-speciﬁed the analysis of the following out-
comes: (t.i) teachers’ perceptions about the proportion of their students that will succeed in the
ENEM test and be admitted in a college (either public or private) in 2020; (t.ii) teachers’ expectation
on grades of students on the ENEM 2019 essay; (s.i) students’ plans for 2020 (work, college, or both),
which we will use to understand whether the programs shift students’ aspirations towards attaining
post-secondary education.
Knowledge About Students. We measure teachers’ knowledge using the following variables: (t.i) teach-
ers’ perceptions on how much they know about the strengths and weaknesses of their students in
writing essays, and on Grammar and Literature, in a scale of 1 to 10; (t.ii) diﬀerence between the
actual average grade in the exam’s essay and the teachers’ predicted average grade of their students
in public schools in the written essay of ENEM 2019.
4.2.3. Secondary Outcomes. To understand whether eﬀects on test-speciﬁc writing skills would
spill-over to diﬀerent textual genres, we asked students to write a narrative essay in the same day
we collected the ENEM training essays in schools. The essay proposal and the grading criteria were
also developed and corrected independently by CAEd/UFJF. The proposal presented the student with
three motivating elements. The ﬁrst one was a deﬁnition of biography as a textual genre. The second
and third ones were excerpts from biographies. At the end of the page, students were instructed to
write a narrative telling the reader about a special moment in her life-story.
To study learning in other subjects during the year, we use administrative data on all other 2019
multiple-choice ENEM test scores and on the multiple choice state’s standardized exams. We combine
information from the ENEM Mathematics, Natural Sciences, Human Sciences tests, and the PAEBES
Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry standardized exams to test our main hypothesis on indirect
eﬀects on the accumulation of skills in subjects non-related to Language. We proceed similarly for the
subjects that are related to Language, using the ENEM Language and Codes test and the PAEBES
Language (reading) exam administered by SEDU/ES.
4.3
Econometric Framework
4.3.1. Identiﬁcation and Estimation. Given the randomized nature of the assignment mechanism,
the causal impact of being oﬀered a chance to use the ed techs can be studied by comparing outcomes
in schools selected for the treatment conditions and outcomes in schools selected to form the control
group. Since we have data on two diﬀerent exams for our primary outcome, we append the two scores
to maximize the power of our experiment and estimate the intention-to-treat (ITT) eﬀects using the
following regression:
Yise = τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
W Enhanced AWE
s
+ τ Pure AWE
ITT
W Pure AWE
s
+ X′
iseΠ + ǫise
(1)
19The division of tasks into the 4 ﬁrst groups was built from the O*NET list of typical tasks of high school teachers,
and maps well into the Teaching and Learning International Survey (TALIS) of OCDE countries.
15

where Yise is the essay score of student i, in school s, for exam e, which can be the score in the 2019
ENEM essay or in the argumentative essay that was included in the state’s standardized test and
W Enhanced AWE
s
(W Pure AWE
s
) is an indicator that takes value 1 if school s was randomly assigned to the
version of the ed tech with(out) human graders. In equation (1), the vector Xise contains strata ﬁxed
eﬀects, an indicator variable of the exam, and the school- and individual-level covariates speciﬁed in
the pre-analysis plan.20 The diﬀerential ITT eﬀect between the two ed techs is estimated using the
regression:
Yise = τ ∆W Enhanced AWE
s
+ ˜X′
iseΓ + νise,
(2)
where we include only students from the two treatment arms. In this regression, the vector of covariates
˜X′
ise includes the artiﬁcial intelligence score from the ﬁrst essay of the program, in addition to all
covariates in Xise.21 Since both treatment arms are indistinguishable prior to the feedback students
received from this ﬁrst essay, this variable can be used as a covariate. Of course, this cannot be used in
the regression model (1), because this information is not available for the control students. The idea
of estimating the diﬀerential eﬀect from regression (2) instead of using regression (1) is that we expect
this variable to be highly correlated with the follow-up essay scores, which will potentially improve the
power in this comparison. In the case of other individual and teacher-level regressions, we estimate:
Yis = τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
W Enhanced AWE
s
+ τ Pure AWE
ITT
W Pure AWE
s
+ X′
isΛ + νis,
(3)
where Yis is an outcome of interest — for instance, the number of ENEM training essays written or
assigned — for student or teacher i and the other variables have been deﬁned above. In the teacher
regressions we only add our school-level covariates. In the regressions using student data we add the
same controls added in speciﬁcation (1).
4.3.2. Inference. Inference is based on the inspection of three diﬀerent sets of p-values. First, we
present p-values based on standard errors clustered at the strata level. As reported by de Chaisemartin
and Ramirez-Cuellar (2019), standard errors clustered at the school level would be downward biased
in this setting. This is conﬁrmed by the inference assessment proposed by Ferman (2019), which shows
that clustering at the school level would lead to over-rejection, while clustering at the strata level is
reliable. Note that this way we take into account in our speciﬁcation for the primary outcome that
we may have information on more than one essay for each student. Second, we present randomization
inference p-values using the randomization protocol and 1,000 placebos that maintain the stratiﬁed
20The school-level covariates, which we can merge with data from both exams, are the 2018 average ENEM essay score
in the full score or in each skill. We add as school-level covariates the school average ENEM score in 2018 or, for each
skill group subject, the school average in the group or subject. The individual-level covariates are: (i) female indicator;
(ii) age dummies ranging from 17 or less to 23 or more; (iii) educational and occupational characteristics of the mother
and father of the students; (iv) household income category; (v) baseline Language and Mathematics proﬁciency scores
using data from another state’s standardized exam that happened right before the treatments were implemented. These
covariates are interacted with the exam indicator to take into account that the set of covariates available for observations
from the 2019 ENEM are diﬀerent from the other exam (we cannot identify students in the ENEM essay in order to
observe baseline achievement for these students). We also replace missing school-level and individual-level continuous
covariate values with the control group mean and included an indicator for missing in this covariate in the regression.
For discrete covariates we created a complementary category for missing variables.
21We are not be able to match students on the ENEM 2019 microdata. Therefore, this variable will only be included
as covariate for the other essay score. We will interact this variable with an indicator variable for the ENEM essay.
16

structure of the original assignment mechanism. The inference tests use the coeﬃcient estimate as
the randomization test statistic.22 Third, we present p-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis test-
ing (MHT) based on the procedure proposed by Holm (1979).23 There are two possible margins of
adjustment: multiple treatments and multiple outcomes. Thus, for instance, when we consider the
main eﬀects of the treatments on the three ENEM groups of skills, we will correct for the fact that we
are testing six hypotheses (three outcomes and two treatments). To simplify the interpretation of the
main ﬁndings and maximize the power of our tests on mechanisms we also condense variables within
a family a mechanisms discussed in Section 3 following the hypothesis testing procedure of Anderson
(2008), unless otherwise speciﬁed.
4.4
Design Validity
4.4.1. Balance. In Table 1, we consider if the assignment mechanism generated balanced groups
across treatment arms. Columns 1, 2 and 3 present estimates of each treatment indicator and their
diﬀerence from ordinary least squares regression with strata indicators. Standard errors clustered at
the strata level are in parentheses and p-values from inference tests are in columns 4, 5 and 6.
Panel A uses standardized individual level covariates from ENEM 2018. Overall, we ﬁnd that the
experimental sample of schools is balanced according to this set of observables. If anything, treated
schools’ students fared slightly worse in the ENEM 2018 written essay and other exams, but such
diﬀerences tend to be small in size and are never statistically signiﬁcant.
Panel B uses student-level information from a standardized exam that was implemented by the
State’s Education Department in all public schools in Esp´ırito Santo in April 16th 2019.
Treated
schools were informed by the State’s Education Department about the additional inputs from the pure
and the enhanced AWE on April 11th, and teachers’ training started only after the standardized exam
(end of April). Therefore, it is safe to assume that treatment assignment did not meaningfully aﬀect
the results in this exam. These data provide valuable information because it is based on the students
that actually participated in the experiment, as opposed to the variables discussed above. Consistent
with the results shown in Panel A, we ﬁnd that students in the treatment arms had slightly worse test
scores in Portuguese Language and Mathematics at baseline, but once again these diﬀerences are not
statistically signiﬁcant. Also consistent with the randomized assignment mechanism, the joint p-values
(Young, 2018) in the bottom rows of Table 1 are greater than 0.701 for all comparisons.
The comparison between experiment arms for a wide range of covariates thus provides compelling
evidence that the randomization generated statistically comparable groups of students at baseline.
Notice, however, that Table 1 does not contain all the variables we use as covariates in speciﬁcations
22Speciﬁcally, we present, for each relevant estimate, the proportion of placebo estimates that are larger (in absolute
value, in the case of one-sided test) than the “actual” estimate. This procedure has the advantage of providing inference
with correct size regardless of sample size and are particularly important for the sample of teachers, for which we can’t rely
on a large-sample for inference purposes. To test the hypothesis of no treatment eﬀect in each arm, we use two separate
sets of permutations. For instance, to test whether the standard program had no eﬀect, we keep the assignment of schools
in the pure AWE treatment arm and generate 1,000 alternative draws under the original randomization protocol for units
in the control and the enhanced treatment, proceeding analogously when testing whether the pure AWE program had no
eﬀect.
23The Holm (1979) MHT adjustment works by ordering the p-values from smallest to largest, with their corresponding
null hypotheses. Then the smallest p-value is multiplied by 6, the second one is multiplied by 5 and so on. Formally,
we set the Holm adjusted p-values ˆph
i = min(kiˆpi, 1), where ki is the number of p-values at least as large as ˆpi within a
family of hypothesis.
17

(1) and (2).
The other covariates were collected at the student’s questionnaire (for example, age,
parents’ education, and household wealth), so we do not have information for all students at baseline.
We consider balance with respect to these covariates in the next paragraphs by conditioning our samples
to non-attritors.
4.4.2. Attrition. The ﬁrst rows in Table 2 presents estimates and inference tests for attrition in our
main analytical samples. Column 1 presents attrition rates in the control group. Columns 2, 3 and 4
present estimates from speciﬁcation (3), an ordinary least squares regression with indicators for each
of the two experiment arms and strata indicators. In columns 5 to 7, we add to this regression the
school-level and individual-level controls available in the beginning of the year that we use in our main
regressions.
For the analysis of student-level data, we start with the baseline list of 19,516 students in exper-
imental schools using the same data on the April standardized exam we used for balance. For the
nonoﬃcial ENEM essay we administered, we ﬁnd an attrition rate of 22% for students in the control
schools, with no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences among students in the treated schools. We reach the
same conclusion by considering attrition in the students’ questionnaire we used to collect information
on the mechanisms, where the proportion of attriters was 17%.
For the oﬃcial ENEM essay, we do not have identiﬁed information at the student level. For this
reason, we are only able to identify the students’ school and whether the student was a high school
senior in 2019. Thus, for each school, we contrast the number of students with information on the
ENEM essay with the number of students enrolled in April 2019 to investigate attrition problems.
In these data, we also ﬁnd that the share of students that are present in the ENEM essay is not
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent across the experimental groups.
In Appendix Tables A.2 and A.3 we also consider balance on all our covariates conditional on being
a non-attriter, respectively for the nonoﬃcial and the oﬃcial ENEM essays. We ﬁnd no evidence that
the experimental groups are diﬀerent even when we condition on being observed. Considering the
three treatment arms and the two datasets, we have six pairwise comparisons, with joint p-values of
equality (Young, 2018) for all covariates ranging from 0.161 to 0.910. This provides further evidence
that student-level attrition is not a problem in our analysis.
The fourth row in Table 2 describes attrition in the teacher-level data. We collected information
on 84.6% (274) of the 324 teachers assigned to teach high school senior classes in schools in the
experimental sample as of April 2019. The estimates of attrition indicate that teachers working in
schools that adopted the enhanced AWE system were more likely to attrite (p-value=0.080). This
conclusion holds whether we control only for strata ﬁxed eﬀects (column 2) or when we also add the
ENEM 2018 average essay score in the school (column 5). We discuss robustness tests on our teacher
results while presenting the results.
4.4.3. Mobility. A potential threat to the validity of our experiment would be students switching to
diﬀerent schools because of the treatment. This could happen if, for instance, more motivated students
moved to treated schools to get access to the ed techs. In the nonoﬃcial ENEM essay, we are able to
identify individual students. Therefore, this does not pose a signiﬁcant problem, as we would able to
consider the initial allocation as an instrument for treatment status. However, for the oﬃcial ENEM
essay, students’ mobility could be a more serious problem, as we are only able to identify students’
18

schools and whether they were graduating that year.
We expected such movements to be extremely unlikely because the randomization and disclosure
of the treated schools were made in the middle of April 2019, a couple of months after the school year
began. Nevertheless, we use administrative data from SEDU/ES initial allocation and transfers to
check if this is a relevant concern. we contrast the enrollment list of students in the PAEBES exam,
which took place in October 2019, with the same data on the April standardized exam we used to
assess balance and attrition. The results are shown in the last row of Table 2. We ﬁnd that, in control
schools, only 1.2% of the students enrolled at the end of the year were not originally enrolled in the
same schools in April 2019. Again, these proportions are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for students in the
treated schools.
Overall, the absence of patterns in student mobility related to treatment assignment, combined with
the evidence above that there is no diﬀerential attrition, provides evidence that the set of students
at the end of the year in experimental schools is representative of the set of the students in those
schools at the time of the randomization. Moreover, the results we present in Section 5 show that
the treatments signiﬁcantly aﬀected essay scores, but did not have signiﬁcant eﬀects in other exams.
This provides evidence that students’ mobility is not an issue when we consider the data from the
oﬃcial ENEM essay. For the nonoﬃcial ENEM essay, in which we can identify individual students, we
consider the initial school enrollment to deﬁne the treatment variables in equations (1) and (2).24
5
Main Results
5.1
Implementation and Compliance
We start by describing the timing of the experiment and the compliance behavior of teachers and
students in treated schools using engagement data available from the implementer.
5.1.1. Teachers. Teachers were not aware of being part of a randomized trial with two treatment
arms. In spite of the meaningful diﬀerences between ed techs, they complied very similarly with the
experiment.25 Figure 2 shows that more than 95% of teachers used the ed techs to assign and collect
essays in each of the ﬁve writing activities. This is somewhat surprising, given that the use of the
technologies was enthusiastically supported but not set as mandatory by the educational authority of
the state. We observe little or no variation between writing activities and across treatment arms and,
24Since mobility is very low, however, results are virtually the same if we consider the end-of-the-year allocation of
students for both exams.
25The implementation started in mid April 2019 with itinerant presentations of both ed techs across the educational ad-
ministrative units of Esp´ırito Santo. The academic year starts in February, but the state educational authority postponed
this step of the intervention until all the laptops were distributed to schools in the experimental sample. The presentations
were scheduled and enforced by the State’s Education Department through direct and online communication with the
treated schools’ principals. In each administrative unit, the implementers’ staﬀdivided schools according to randomiza-
tion status to two diﬀerent rooms, one for each ed-tech. These presentations consisted of 2-hour informal lectures on how
to use the platform and on which type of individual and aggregate information it would store during the year. In order
to standardize the presentations and minimize the likelihood of suggesting that there would be two diﬀerent AWE-based
systems being used across schools, the presenter were either only in charge of presenting the enhanced or the pure AWE
treatment. These presentations were attended by 257 individuals representing 101 schools (92%). These individuals were
not all teachers (one third were). Consistent with the randomization and blinded nature of the experiment, there is no
diﬀerence in the probability that a teacher was sent as a representative by treatment arm (p-value = 0.469). To boost
engagement and circumvent implementation problems, teachers that were not present in the training sessions were also
invited to online training sessions.
19

in fact, we cannot reject the null hypothesis of no diﬀerence in the evolution of compliance throughout
2019 (p-value = 0.245).26 In the pure AWE arm, in particular, the high compliance is inconsistent
with teachers avoiding to use a system that they don’t perfectly understand —or, even worse, fear.27
5.1.2.
Students.
We also observed relatively high and similar levels of student compliance.
At
each writing activity, 75 to 80% of students enrolled in treated schools submitted essays through the
platform. Again, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that compliance throughout the year was equal
in both treatment arms (p-value = 0.464).
As discussed in Section 2, the feedback enhancement by human graders took, on average, three
business days. To investigate whether such lag had meaningful eﬀects on compliance in the enhanced
AWE ed tech arm, the trend in the bottom of Figure 2 depicts the share of students submitting essays
that entered the platform to check the enhanced grading. The share starts at 70%, falls slightly in
the following three activities and then in the last one, when one in every two students who submitted
essays came back for their grading.28
While these ﬁgures corroborate the importance of receiving
immediate feedback (as highlighted by Muralidharan et al., 2019), they also allow us to consider that
diﬀerences in eﬀects should not simply be a result of students not fully complying with the enhanced
grading. As we will show, we also ﬁnd that students perceived a higher quality on the feedback in the
enhanced AWE ed tech, which also suggests that compliance was large enough to generate meaningful
diﬀerences in treatment arms.
5.2
Primary Outcome: ENEM Essay Scores
Table 3 presents the main results of the experiment, which are also depicted graphically in Figure 3.
In Table 3, column 1 documents that the enhanced and the pure AWE ed techs had almost identical
eﬀects on ENEM essay scores, at 0.095σ. Columns 2 to 4 show that the total eﬀects are channeled by
very similar positive eﬀects in scores that measure each group of writing skills valued in the essay. The
results we ﬁnd in the pooled data are very similar to the ones we obtain by considering each one of the
essay scores separately (Appendix Figure A.1). Since the topics of the last writing activity and the
2019 ENEM essay were about the social role of art, the fact that we ﬁnd similar results considering
only the nonoﬃcial ENEM essay minimizes concerns on the external validity of the results found in
the pooled data.
For both ed techs and outcomes, we are able reject the null hypothesis of no treatment eﬀects (Panel
A) and unable to reject the null hypothesis of no diﬀerential eﬀects (Panel B). Thus, the additional
inputs from human graders did not aﬀect the extent to which the ed techs were able to improve scores
capturing a broad set of writing skills.
Column 2 presents eﬀects on the ﬁrst group of skills valued in the ENEM essay, which are related to
26We test this hypothesis by running a regression of the teachers’ indicator of compliance at the extensive margin —
measured by an indicator of assigning and having students submit essays through the platform — on treatment arm
indicators, writing activity indicators and their interactions and testing that the interaction terms are jointly signiﬁcant.
27Additionally, the fact that compliance was sustained rules out the possibility that teachers learnt and became disap-
pointed with the quality of the feedback from both ed techs. Since diﬀerences in mechanisms on the teacher-side will not
be driven by large diﬀerences in compliance, we can interpret the estimated ITT eﬀects as good approximations of the
average eﬀect on the treated parameter. These measures of compliance also contribute to the educational research on the
topic, which so far dealt only with subjective measures of social acceptance of AWE systems (see Wilson and Roscoe,
2019, for instance).
28We can reject the null hypothesis that compliance was stable throughout the year (p-value < 0.001).
20

syntax. In ENEM, scores capturing syntactic skills measure both the ability of students to correctly use
the formal norm of written language and their ability to build a sound linguistic structure connecting
the various parts of the essay. Panel A documents that the enhanced AWE ed tech increased scores in
syntactic skills in 0.066σ and that the pure AWE ed tech increased scores in 0.056σ. In Panel B, we
show that these absolute eﬀects do not translate into signiﬁcant diﬀerential eﬀects.
Notice that syntactic skills are the ones in which both ed techs fare similarly in capturing and
fostering, since both are able to instantaneously ﬂag deviations from the formal written norm and
identify whether the essays have well-built linguistic structures. Thus, it is perhaps not surprising that
the additional inputs from human graders did not matter much for scores in syntactic skills. As we
now show, we also found indistinguishable eﬀects on scores measuring writing skills that one might
consider as skills in which the AI system would fall short in capturing.
The second group of writing skills, which we refer to as analytic, are related to the ability of students
to develop a globally coherent thesis on the topic. The development of this thesis in a successful essay
allows students to mobilize elements from diﬀerent areas of knowledge (for instance, history, philosophy
and arts). High scores in analytical skills thus beneﬁt not only students that “write well” but also
students that have a more solid educational background and can leverage potential synergies with
other topics covered in the post-primary education curriculum. In fact, at least part of this is not
even supposed to be built in schools, as a perfect score is only given to students that showcase a “vast
socio-cultural background”. Despite the intuitive leverage that human participation would entail in
helping students to develop such a complex set of skills, we ﬁnd very similar eﬀects of both ed techs.
In Panel A, column 3, we show that the enhanced AWE ed tech increased scores in syntactic skills in
0.042σ and that the pure AWE ed tech increased scores in 0.061σ (the ﬁrst estimate is only marginally
signiﬁcant, MHT adjusted p-value = 0.152). Once again, Panel B documents that these eﬀects do not
translate into signiﬁcant diﬀerential eﬀects.
Most surprisingly, we document particularly large and, once again, very similar, eﬀects on the policy
proposal skill in column 4. The point estimates are 0.161σ and 0.143σ for enhanced and the pure AWE
ed tech, respectively. In Section 2, we argued that the policy proposal skill is the most sophisticated
skill in the exam. The reasons are twofold. First, the ability to present a consistent policy contribution
makes this a “global” property of the essay. That is, only in reference to the thesis presented in the
starting paragraphs will a policy conclusion be interpreted and graded. Second, policy proposals are
the means by which students showcase creativity and problem-solving skills.
Given the complexity and semantic nuances in providing grades and feedback on analytical and
policy proposal skills, the absence of diﬀerences between positive eﬀects of both ed techs suggests that
teachers ended up ﬁlling in some of the gaps or limitations of the pure AWE ed tech. We present more
evidence in this direction in Section 5.3.
Even though the eﬀects we ﬁnd could be considered small when compared to the ones reported
in the program evaluation literature, there are relevant facts one should consider when interpreting
magnitudes in this setting. First, language’s most sensitive period of development happens before
adolescence and tends to be less responsive to variation in educational inputs (see Knudsen et al.,
2006). To the extent that writing ability is a higher-order dimension of linguistic development, this
feature should also apply to writing among 17 to 19 year-old students, and perhaps even more so.
Second, students in our setting are much more heterogeneous in terms of their writing scores than in
21

terms of their scores in multiple-choice tests.29 Thus, it is questionable whether benchmarking sizes
using policy eﬀects on the distribution of multiple-choice test scores would be a meaningful exercise.
With that in mind, and since public school students compete with private school students in
college admission, we benchmark magnitudes using the national argumentative essay public-private
achievement gap and ﬁnd that the ed techs mitigate 9% of the gap. In the policy proposal, the eﬀects
we ﬁnd imply a reduction of 20% in the skill-speciﬁc gap, which is currently at a high 80%. Overall, we
consider that these are economically meaningful eﬀects that bear policy relevance, specially in a setting
with a schooling system that is sharply segmented and reﬂects various diﬀerences in socio-economic
backgrounds.
5.3
Mechanisms
5.3.1. Training and Feedback. We start our discussion on mechanisms by considering how individ-
ual training and feedback in its many potential forms —comments on essays, grades and individual
discussions with teachers— responded to the incorporation of the ed techs. The results are in Table 4.
On average, students in the control group wrote 4.9 ENEM training essays during the year of the
experiment. In column 1, we report that the enhanced AWE ed tech increased this number by 1.4
essays or 28%. Students using the pure AWE ed tech wrote, in turn, 1.6 more essays than students
in the control group, or 32%.
Both estimates are not only large in magnitude, but also precisely
estimated. Using the lower bounds on conﬁdence intervals allow us to reject eﬀects of less than 20% in
both treatment arms. In Panel B, we show that the diﬀerence between the eﬀects of the two programs is
insigniﬁcant. Hence, both ed techs induced similar increases in ENEM-oriented training. These results
are informative about how instruction reacts to the new inputs provided by the ed techs, suggesting
that they did not crowd out one by one the essays teachers would assign themselves. In addition, the
results are inconsistent with the ed techs inducing writing tasks to take much more time, either because
of problems with the Internet, lack of computers, or diﬃculties with the use of the technologies.
During the year, students may have received comments or annotations on essays written, either
handwritten by teachers or sent through the platform in the treatment conditions. In the students’
questionnaire, we asked students how many of the ENEM training essays they wrote were commented
or annotated. The results are shown in column 2 and indicate, once again, similar and highly signiﬁcant
positive eﬀects of 37-38% (1.3 essays on an average of 3.4 essays) in both treatment arms. In column
5, we document that the number of essays that were graded increased —and not diﬀerentially so—
with the ed techs. Students on both arms observe grades on the essays submitted to the teachers or
to the online platform in 1.6-1.7 more essays, a highly signiﬁcant increase of 43-45%.
Regarding the quality of the feedback, 81% of the students in control schools claimed that they
found the comments and annotations on essays somewhat or very useful to improve ENEM writing
skills. The participation in either of the treatment arms raises this probability to approximately 87-
88% (10%), as shown in column 3, Panel A. In Panel B, we conﬁrm statistically that both ed techs
had similar impacts on this margin. Column 4 presents the same estimates using a more stringent
criteria on feedback quality. Conﬁrming the intuition that external human graders improve the outputs
29Taking ENEM 2018 as an example, the dispersion of this distribution is almost two times the one of the Mathematics
scores and almost three times the one of the Language scores. At a very general level, this suggests that there is some
degree of heterogeneity being captured by scores on essays that is is not captured in multiple-choice exams.
22

generated by the pure AWE system, we ﬁnd that students using the enhanced AWE ed tech were 6
percentage points or 14% more likely to claim that the comments or annotations on their essays
were very useful. The results in the pure AWE, in turn, are negligible in size (1 p.p. or 2%) and
statistically insigniﬁcant. As shown in Panel B, the results we ﬁnd on the diﬀerence between ed techs
are individually signiﬁcant and marginally signiﬁcant after the MHT adjustments (p-value=0.120, for
the latter). All in all, these results indicate that the incorporation of the ed techs into instruction
improved feedback quality and alleviated at least some human capital constraints of teachers with
respect to the counterfactual feedback. Moreover, the diﬀerential eﬀects in perceived quality show
that the lack of diﬀerence in treatment eﬀects on essay scores does not come from students failing to
fully comply with the enhanced AWE ed tech by not checking the ﬁnal feedback.
Finally, we asked students about the number of graded essays that ended up being discussed with
teachers. This question was added to the questionnaire to understand if integrating both technologies
could support the individualization of writing pedagogy. Following Autor et al. (2003), we included
this question to capture a potential complementarity be between the system’s parsing and grading
tasks and teacher’s nonroutine analytical (interpretation) and interactive tasks (providing in-person
individualized advice). If teachers completely delegated essays’ training tasks to the ed techs, then we
should expect no eﬀect, or even a negative eﬀect on this variable. In contrast, we should expect an
increase if teachers complemented the ed techs.
The results are presented in column 6. Students in both treatment arms discussed roughy 35% more
essays individually with teachers. Once again, marginal results are highly robust to MHT adjustments,
and we do not ﬁnd evidence of diﬀerential eﬀects. This result helps reconcile the lack of diﬀerential
eﬀects between the two treatment arms on skills that pure AWE systems would have more diﬃculty
in assessing and fostering. Notice, additionally, that these results are inconsistent with the ed techs
leading to a complete delegation of tasks to the new inputs.30
5.3.2. Teachers’ Time Allocation. We asked teachers to describe the time available to cover the
topics in each subject of the high school senior curriculum in 2019. The possible answers for all subjects
they typically cover (writing, Grammar and Literature) were on a 5-point Likert scale and ranged from
“Time very insuﬃcient” to “Time more than suﬃcient”. As shown in Panel A of Table 5, columns
1 to 3, the enhanced AWE ed tech improved these indicators by roughly 0.3 or 12% across teaching
subjects. Column 4 documents that these changes translated into a signiﬁcant improvement of 0.26σ
in a summary index (Anderson, 2008). In turn, the pure AWE ed tech had a negligible impact on the
summary index and on each of its components. Appendix Figure A.2 further investigates this margin
of change by plotting distributions of answers for writing. The bar graphs show that 23% of teachers
in control schools said that they felt that the time was very insuﬃcient. This proportion drops to 9%
for teachers using the enhanced AWE (p-value=0.008, result not shown), but is roughly unchanged
for teachers using the pure AWE ed tech. Taken together, Table 5 and Appendix Figure A.2 present
suggestive evidence that the enhanced AWE —but not the pure AWE— was able to alleviate time
30We also collected data on essays’ assignment in the teachers’ survey. The results are in Appendix Table A.4. Overall,
we do not ﬁnd evidence that these variables were aﬀected by the introduction of the ed techs. Our interpretation (specially,
giving what we found using student-level data) is that this information ended up being much less informative than the
results we found using student-level data. First, the teacher survey asked about assignment, which may not have been
complied by students. Moreover, even after winsorizing answers as speciﬁed in the pre-analysis plan, we were left with
observations that led us to think that the numbers of essays were implausibly large. Finally, we also had diﬀerential
attrition in the teachers’ survey.
23

constraints, at least for some teachers. The fact that teachers that used the enhanced AWE ed tech
felt less time constrained is consistent with evidence shown in Table 6. Panel A, column 1, shows that
teachers in this arm worked 1.2 hours less from home in a typical week. This eﬀect amounts to −20%
of the control group mean (5.9 hours), is marginally signiﬁcant (p-value = 0.112). At face value, these
results suggest that teachers adjusted labor supply downwards in response to the incorporation of the
enhanced AWE ed tech. However, we consider these results with caution, given that, as described in
Section 4, we found diﬀerential attrition in the teachers’ survey. In Appendix Table A.5, we compute
lower and upper bounds associated with the estimates discussed above (Lee, 2009).
Turning to columns 2 to 5 in Table 6, we discuss the eﬀects of the ed techs on hours allocated to each
group of tasks. Overall, we ﬁnd little support for changes along this margin. The estimates tend to be
imprecisely estimated, being insigniﬁcant but also including meaningful values of treatment eﬀects. To
provide a more direct test in time allocation changes and maximize the power of our comparisons we
also present p-values from chi-squared tests. As the individual estimates on tasks, this exercise provides
little support for changes in time allocation in both treatment arms. Finally, in column 6, we sum the
hours allocated to tasks in columns 4 and 5 to compute the share of time spent in nonroutine tasks.
The results suggest little role for adjustments in time outside the classroom playing an important role
in our results.
5.3.3. Other Mechanisms. In Table 7, we investigate whether the ed techs shifted teachers’ ex-
pectations and students’ aspirations toward academic tracks after high school. Overall, we ﬁnd little
support for these mechanisms playing a large role in boosting teachers’ instructional eﬀorts and/or
students’ training and ultimately shaping the eﬀects we ﬁnd on ENEM essay scores. Additionally, in
columns 1-3 of Table 8, we document that the ed techs did not aﬀect teachers’ perceptions on knowing
their students’ strengths and weaknesses. Using the diﬀerence between a teachers’ average student
guessed score and the actual score as outcomes in column 4, we do not ﬁnd strong evidence that the
information from the ed techs’ (individual grades and feedback or “average” indicators of performance)
made teachers more accurate about their students’ future ENEM achievement. Thus, the results on
all outcomes suggest little role for changes in perceived or objective knowledge about students playing
an important role in our results.
5.4
Secondary Outcomes: Learning in Other Topics
We now consider whether the shifts in educational inputs oriented at the ENEM essay described above
had indirect eﬀects on scores capturing other skills, either related or unrelated to writing and literacy.
The results are in Table 9 and provide strong evidence that the eﬀects of the ed techs were restricted to
their main goal of improving ENEM essay scores. In particular, they are inconsistent with meaningful
complementarities and crowd-out in eﬀort from students or in time dedicated by teachers to other
topics.
Column 1 shows that there is little support in the data for changes in the writing skills used to write
essays following another textual genre (narrative). The estimates are not only insigniﬁcant, but also
negligible in size and, again, there is no evidence of diﬀerential eﬀects. These are meaningful results
from a general perspective on human capital formation, since one might consider that more general
writing skills are valuable in future tasks students face in post-secondary education and in the labor
market. The results are also relevant from a direct policy perspective on college admission, since other
24

exams use scores on the narrative genre as criteria. In column 2, we investigate whether the changes we
described in students’ training and Language teachers’ behavior ended up having downstream eﬀects
on topics related to reading and literacy. Again, we ﬁnd little evidence of any absolute or diﬀerential
eﬀects. In column 3, we reach similar conclusions by pooling data on multiple-choice tests capturing
skills that are not related to literacy. Since we pool several sources of data, we are able to reject even
small negative spillover adverse eﬀects in each of these families of outcomes, suggesting that the eﬀects
of the ed techs were restricted to their main goal of improving ENEM essay scores.
5.5
Heterogeneity
In Appendix Table A.6 we investigate whether treatment eﬀects are heterogeneous with respect to
students’ and teachers’ characteristics, using students’ socio-demographic variables (gender, race and
household income), full and partial school shift, and baseline Language achievement. There is little
support for the hypothesis that sub-samples of girls, blacks or pardos, poor (below median household
income) and full-shift students were diﬀerentially aﬀected by the ed techs. We do ﬁnd some evidence
that eﬀects on students in the bottom quartile of the baseline Language distribution are smaller and,
for the pure AWE arm, that eﬀects are channeled by students in classes where teachers have above
median workload, as measured by the number of classes taught.
However, when one adjusts the
marginal p-values for the number of heterogeneity margins, these results become insigniﬁcant. Overall,
we conclude that there is no evidence of stark eﬀect heterogeneity across sub-samples of the data.
6
Final Remarks
Elbow (1981) provides an insightful description of a male Language teacher doing extra-hours:
“He sits at his desk reading student papers. He is half done with a batch, the unread stack
neatly piled to his left, each paper tightly folded long-wise; the graded pile a bit helter-skelter
to his right. It is late and he stops for another cup of tea, annoyed he didn’t start earlier in
the evening. If he is a conscientious teacher he assigns a paper every week to every student
he has. But he also kicks himself as he sits there sipping tea because he is acutely aware of
how it is he who brought this job down on his own head. [...] If he isn’t so conscientious
he assigns writing every few weeks but he feels guilty because he knows this doesn’t give his
students enough practice and it means that his comment and advice on a student’s paper
this time will probably have no useful eﬀect at all on what the student writes next time.”
(p. 255)
The excerpt highlights important features of the work of Language teachers, which are supported by
anecdotal evidence we found in the ﬁeld. Teachers know that essay assignments and practice should
be frequent. Nevertheless, marking essays and providing careful feedback takes time, specially if the
most rudimentary writing skills —such as syntax— are not well-developed by the writer. Thus, even
for highly-motivated or “conscientious” teachers, time constraints will predictably bind. In developing
countries, the downstream eﬀects of these time constraints will potentially be reinforced by human
capital constraints (for a discussion, see Banerjee et al., 2013). This paper provides evidence that
AWE systems can help overcome bottlenecks that prevent accumulation of writing skills.
25

We show that, despite large diﬀerences in structure and costs, the two ed techs we study positively
impacted each one of the dimensions of writing valued in the argumentative essay of a nation-wide
college admission exam. The most robust evidence on mechanisms indicates that these impacts were
channeled by large increases in training, improvements in feedback and more frequent personal interac-
tions with teachers. The latter mechanism suggests that AI —be it “supervised” or “unsupervised”—
will not simply substitute what are arguably teachers’ most valuable inputs. The new wave of ed tech
may instead open space for more individualized pedagogy and a division of labor that dynamically
takes into account what are the tasks in which humans and machines hold comparative advantage.
More generally, the absence of diﬀerential eﬀects between the two ed techs is informative about
the potentials and limitations of applications of artiﬁcial intelligence. Putting ourselves in the shoes of
the implementer and interpreting their actions in the light of the citation above is useful to frame this
discussion. The implementer saw in one of the ﬁrst Brazilian Portuguese AWE systems the potential
of quickly providing some feedback to students and allowing teachers to outsource some of the “heavy
lifting” of essay parsing and grading to an automate. The grading would then be enhanced by human
graders, at the cost of a lag between students attempting a problem and receiving the complete feed-
back. In this sense, human graders were hired to circumvent the AWE systems most salient limitations:
its lack of ability to contemplate semantic nuances (interpret) and accurately adjust communication
to be useful to highly heterogeneous students (interact). Essentially, this enhancement tried to push
the AWE system towards being more like a human in order to deliver high-quality, individually cus-
tomized and interactive content. In the ﬁeld, we found that ed-techs generated very similar compliance,
induced the same increases in student eﬀort and in the amount of feedback. Most importantly, we
found that teachers did not simply delegate their tasks and that both ed techs highly supported the
individualization of pedagogy —which is essentially a nonroutine interpretative and interactive task.
We hope that this case-study on how AI was incorporated by teachers and students end up having
consequences for the policy discussion on AWE in developing countries as these systems are developed
to encompass more languages. More broadly, our results may help alleviate the “technological anxiety”
(Mokyr et al., 2015) that seems to surround the debate in policy circles.
Our results also inform the debate on whether pure AWE systems should be abandoned because
they take linguistic complexity for complexity of thought by simply “counting words” (Perelman, 2014).
We show that the discussion on whether whether AWE systems are able to take all the complexity
of writing into account largely bypasses the fact that these inputs interact with other inputs, such
as teachers’ instructional eﬀorts for a given level of human capital. In light of that, and considering
our experimental design, it is not obvious whether the introduction of AWE systems without being
incorporated as classroom instruction, with the support of school teachers, would generate the same
positive results.
We see that as an interesting avenue for future research.
Still, our results show
promising prospects of using AWE systems to improve learning.
26

References
Abaurre, M. L. M. and Abaurre, M. B. M. (2012). Um olhar objetivo para a produ¸c˜ao escrita: analisar,
avaliar, comentar.
Acemoglu, D. and Autor, D. (2011). Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employment and
earnings. In Handbook of labor economics, volume 4, pages 1043–1171. Elsevier.
Anderson, M. L. (2008). Multiple inference and gender diﬀerences in the eﬀects of early intervention:
A reevaluation of the abecedarian, perry preschool, and early training projects.
Journal of the
American statistical Association, 103(484):1481–1495.
Autor, D. H., Levy, F., and Murnane, R. J. (2003). The skill content of recent technological change:
An empirical exploration. The Quarterly journal of economics, 118(4):1279–1333.
Banerjee, A., Glewwe, P., Powers, S., and Wasserman, M. (2013). Expanding access and increas-
ing student learning in post-primary education in developing countries: A review of the evidence.
Cambridge, MA: Massashusetts Institute of Technology.
Barkaoui, K. and Knouzi, I. (2012). Combining score and text analyses to examine task equivalence in
writing assessments. In Measuring Writing: Recent Insights into Theory, Methodology and Practice,
pages 83–115. Brill.
Bettinger, E., Fairlie, R. W., Kapuza, A., Kardanova, E., Loyalka, P., and Zakharov, A. (2020). Does
edtech substitute for traditional learning? experimental estimates of the educational production
function. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Borman, G. D., Dowling, N. M., and Schneck, C. (2008). A multisite cluster randomized ﬁeld trial of
open court reading. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 30(4):389–407.
Bulman, G. and Fairlie, R. W. (2016).
Technology and education: Computers, software, and the
internet. In Handbook of the Economics of Education, volume 5, pages 239–280. Elsevier.
de Chaisemartin, C. and Ramirez-Cuellar, J. (2019). At what level should one cluster standard errors
in paired experiments? arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.00288.
Doss, C. J., Fahle, E. M., Loeb, S., and York, B. N. (2018). More than just a nudge: Supporting
kindergarten parents with diﬀerentiated and personalized text-messages. Technical report, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Duﬂo, E., Dupas, P., and Kremer, M. (2011). Peer eﬀects, teacher incentives, and the impact of track-
ing: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in kenya. American Economic Review, 101(5):1739–74.
Elbow, P. (1981). Writing with power: Techniques for mastering the writing process. Oxford University
Press.
Ferman, B. (2019). A simple way to assess inference methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.08772.
Ferman, B., Finamor, L., and Lima, L. (2019). Are public schools ready to integrate math classes with
khan academy?
Ferman, B. and Ponczek, V. (2017). Should we drop covariate cells with attrition problems?
Mpra
paper, University Library of Munich, Germany.
27

Fonseca, E., Medeiros, I., Kamikawachi, D., and Bokan, A. (2018). Automatically grading brazilian
student essays. In Computational Processing of the Portuguese Language (Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol 11122). Springer.
Fryer, R. G. (2017). The production of human capital in developed countries: Evidence from 196
randomized ﬁeld experimentsa. In Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, volume 2, pages 95–
322. Elsevier.
Grimes, D. and Warschauer, M. (2010). Utility in a fallible tool: A multi-site case study of automated
writing evaluation. The Journal of Technology, Learning and Assessment, 8(6).
Holm, S. (1979). A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian journal of
statistics, pages 65–70.
INEP/MEC (2018). Reda¸c˜ao do enem 2018. Cartilha do Participante.
INEP/MEC (2019). Reda¸c˜ao do enem 2019. Cartilha do Participante.
Jones, S. M., Brown, J. L., and Lawrence Aber, J. (2011). Two-year impacts of a universal school-based
social-emotional and literacy intervention: An experiment in translational developmental research.
Child Development, 82(2):533–554.
Kim, J. S., Olson, C. B., Scarcella, R., Kramer, J., Pearson, M., van Dyk, D., Collins, P., and Land,
R. E. (2011). A randomized experiment of a cognitive strategies approach to text-based analytical
writing for mainstreamed latino english language learners in grades 6 to 12. Journal of Research on
Educational Eﬀectiveness, 4(3):231–263.
Knudsen, E. I., Heckman, J. J., Cameron, J. L., and Shonkoﬀ, J. P. (2006). Economic, neurobiological,
and behavioral perspectives on building america’s future workforce.
Proceedings of the national
Academy of Sciences, 103(27):10155–10162.
Lee, D. S. (2009).
Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp bounds on treatment
eﬀects. The Review of Economic Studies, 76(3):1071–1102.
Luckin, R., Holmes, W., Griﬃths, M., and Forcier, L. B. (2016). Intelligence unleashed: An argument
for ai in education.
McCurry, D. (2012). Computer scoring and quality of thought in assessing writing.
Mokyr, J., Vickers, C., and Ziebarth, N. L. (2015). The history of technological anxiety and the future
of economic growth: Is this time diﬀerent? Journal of economic perspectives, 29(3):31–50.
Mooney, P. J. (2003). An investigation of the eﬀects of a comprehensive reading intervention on the
beginning reading skills of ﬁrst graders at risk for emotional and behavioral disorders.
Morrow, L. M. (1992).
The impact of a literature-based program on literacy achievement, use of
literature, and attitudes of children from minority backgrounds. Reading Research Quarterly, pages
251–275.
Muralidharan, K., Singh, A., and Ganimian, A. J. (2019). Disrupting education? experimental evidence
on technology-aided instruction in india. American Economic Review.
Neumann, A. (2012). Advantages and disadvantages of diﬀerent text coding procedures for research
and practice in a school context. In Measuring Writing: Recent Insights into Theory, Methodology
and Practice, pages 33–54. Brill.
28

Palermo, C. and Thomson, M. M. (2018). Teacher implementation of self-regulated strategy develop-
ment with an automated writing evaluation system: Eﬀects on the argumentative writing perfor-
mance of middle school students. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 54:255–270.
Perelman, L. (2014). When “the state of the art” is counting words. Assessing Writing, 21:104–111.
Pinnell, G. S., Lyons, C. A., Deford, D. E., Bryk, A. S., and Seltzer, M. (1994). Comparing instructional
models for the literacy education of high-risk ﬁrst graders. Reading Research Quarterly, pages 9–39.
Puma, M., Bell, S., Cook, R., Heid, C., and Lopez, M. (2005). Head start impact study: First year
ﬁndings. Administration for Children & Families.
Shermis, M. D., Burstein, J. C., and Bliss, L. (2008). The impact of automated essay scoring on high
stakes writing assessments. In annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education.
Somers, M.-A., Corrin, W., Sepanik, S., Salinger, T., Levin, J., and Zmach, C. (2010). The enhanced
reading opportunities study ﬁnal report: The impact of supplemental literacy courses for strug-
gling ninth-grade readers. ncee 2010-4021. National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional
Assistance.
Wilson, J. and Roscoe, R. D. (2019). Automated writing evaluation and feedback: Multiple metrics
of eﬃcacy. Journal of Educational Computing Research, page 0735633119830764.
York, B. N. and Loeb, S. (2014). One step at a time: The eﬀects of an early literacy text messaging
program for parents of preschoolers. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Young, A. (2018). Channeling Fisher: Randomization Tests and the Statistical Insigniﬁcance of Seem-
ingly Signiﬁcant Experimental Results*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(2):557–598.
29

Figure 1: Private School Premium in ENEM 2018
Across Tests and Essay
21%
16%
13%
13%
43%
Mathematics
Natural
Sciences
Language
Human
Sciences
Essay
13%
13%
43%
0
10
20
30
40
50
Private School Premium
 Outcome: Test in ENEM 2018
Within Essay
22%
30%
50%
51%
80%
Formal Norm
Argumentative
Structure
 Synctatic Skills
Conformity
w. Topic
Point of
View
 Analytical Skills
 Policy
 Proposal
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Private School Premium
 Outcome: Skill in ENEM Essay 2018
[BACK TO TEXT]
1.
These bar graphs illustrate the magnitude of the achievement gaps between public
and private schools in the diﬀerent exams and in the essay of the Brazilian National
Secondary Education Exam using data on the universe of high school seniors in Brazil
that took each of the tests in 2018. The exam is currently composed of 180 multiple-choice
questions, equally divided into four areas of knowledge (Mathematics, Natural Sciences,
Language and Codes, Human Sciences), and one written essay. The upper ﬁgure relates
to the ﬁve tests that compose the exam. The lower ﬁgure considers each competency in
the written essay individually. We excluded from the sample students from schools that
are administered at the federal level, which are typically very diﬀerent from other public
schools in Brazil.
2.
Syntactic skills comprise two competencies:
“exhibiting command of the formal
written norm of Brazilian Portuguese” and “exhibiting knowledge of the linguistic
mechanisms that lead to the construction of the argument”; Analytic skills comprise
two competencies:
“understanding the proposed topic and applying concepts from
diﬀerent areas of knowledge to develop the argument following the structural limits of
the dissertative-argumentative prose” and “selecting, relating, organizing and interpreting
information, facts, opinions and arguments in defense of a point of view, using pieces of
knowledge acquired in the motivating elements and during the schooling”; Policy proposal
comprises one sub-skill: “ elaborating a policy proposal that could contribute to solve the
problem in question, respecting basic human rights ” (INEP/MEC, 2018).
30

Figure 2: Timeline and Compliance Among Teachers and Students, by Treatment Arm
Form.
Act. 1
Act. 2
Act. 3
Act. 4
Act. 5
ENEM
Writing Test
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Percent of Compliance
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Month in 2019
Enhanced AWE Treatment (Compliance = Student Submitted Essay)
Pure AWE Treatment (Compliance = Student Submitted Essay)
Enhanced AWE Treatment (Compliance = Teacher Assigned Essays)
Pure AWE  Treatment (Compliance = Teacher Assigned Essays)
Enhanced AWE Treatment (Compliance = Student Returned for Grade, Conditional on Submitting)
[BACK TO TEXT]
1. This ﬁgure presents a timeline of the experiment and indicators of compliance of teachers and students with the interventions in both treatment arms.
We always denote compliance events associated with the pure AWE (enhanced) treatment with (non-)dashed lines.
2.
The darkly shaded area in April represents the period when teachers and other school professionals were introduced to the ed-techs in both
treatment arms, either in itinerant presentations or through an online course. Compliance with these presentations is denoted by the hollowed and full
diamonds in this darkly shaded region. The p-value from a simple test of proportion equality between treatment arms using a regression of the teachers’
indicator of presence in the presentation on strata indicators is 0.469 (standard errors clustered at the strata level).
3.
The lightly shaded areas represent the periods when the platform was available for submission of essays for each of the ﬁve writing activi-
ties of the two interventions, which ran concomitantly. For each activity, the lines present the evolution of compliance throughout the 2019 academic
year, for students (connecting circles) and teachers (connecting diamonds). In these two pairs of lines, compliance of students (teachers) is deﬁned as
the submission of an essay (the event of having students submit essays through the platform) for all high school senior classes taught. The p-values for
comparisons of “parallel trends” are 0.464 for students ed tech and 0.245 for teachers. The green line in the bottom of the ﬁgure connecting squares
depicts the proportion of students in the enhanced treatment arm that submitted essays and entered the platform to check the human grader grading
for her essay. We can reject a null hypothesis of constant compliance along this margin (p-value¡0.001).
4.
The dashed vertical lines in October and November denote, respectively, the writing test we administered with the collaboration of the
State’s Education Secretary (October 18th) and the ENEM test (two consecutive Sundays, November 3rd and November 10th).
31

Figure 3: ITT Eﬀects of ed techs on ENEM Essay Scores
p−value=0.895
p−value=0.689
p−value=0.772
p−value=0.660
Full
Syntactic
Analytic
Policy
Proposal
Null Hypothesis: ITTs in both ed techs are equal
−.25
−.2
−.15
−.1
−.05
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
.25
.3
ITT Estimate (90% CI) on ENEM Essay Scores, in Standard Deviations
Outcome: Full Score and Score in Each Skill Group
Enhanced AWE ed tech
Pure AWE ed tech
[BACK TO TEXT]
1. This ﬁgure plots the average intention-to-treat eﬀects and 90% conﬁdence intervals of the enhanced
(full circles) and pure AWE (Automated Writing Evaluation, hollowed circles) ed-techs on the Brazilian
National Secondary Education Exam essay scores. The pure AWE ed-tech is a fully automated system
that provides instantaneous scores and feedback to students using natural language processing and
machine-learning. The enhanced AWE ed-tech uses human graders as an additional resource to enhance
grading and feedback quality. Estimates and standard errors used to construct conﬁdence intervals
are from speciﬁcation (1), an ordinary least squares regression with treatment indicators, strata indi-
cators, school-level controls and individual-level controls. Details on controls are in the notes to Table 3.
2.
The unit of observation is a score of a student that participated in the oﬃcial ENEM 2019
written essay or in an independently administered essay with the same structure and grading criteria
as the ENEM essay (N=29,359). The topic of the essays were “Democratization of Access to Cinema
in Brazil” and “The Construction of a National Brazilian Identity for the Portuguese Language”. The
description of the competencies comprised in each set of skill can be found in the notes to Figure 1.
3.
The p-values are for tests of no diﬀerence between eﬀects in both treatment arms are com-
puted using standard errors clustered at the strata level and speciﬁcation (2), which uses only data
from treated schools and additionally controls for the student AI-provided grade on the ﬁrst writing
activity of the year.
32

Figure 4: ITT Eﬀects of ed techs on Training, Feedback and Individualized Pedagogy
p−value=0.163
p−value=0.457
p−value=0.459
p−value=0.392
Null Hypothesis: ITTs in both ed techs are equal
... Written
 with Annotations
... Received
... Received
 with Grade
... Discussed
 with Teacher
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Estimate (90% CI), in Percent
Outcome: Number of ENEM Essays...
Enhanced AWE ed tech
Pure AWE ed tech
[BACK TO TEXT]
1.
This ﬁgure plots the average intention-to-treat eﬀects and 90% conﬁdence intervals of the
enhanced (full circles) and pure AWE (hollowed circles) ed-techs on individual training and feed-
back in its many potential forms —comments on essays, grades and individual discussions with
teachers— responded to the incorporation of the ed techs.
The inputs to the ﬁgure are estimated
using speciﬁcation (3), an ordinary least squares regression with treatment indicators, strata indi-
cators, school-level controls and individual-level controls. Details on controls are in the notes to Table 4.
2.
The unit of observation is a student that was present in the exam and provided valid
answers to the multiple-choice questions. The variables are, in order:
• the number of essays written to train for the ENEM in 2019, top-coded at 10;
• the number of ENEM training essays that received individualized annotations;
• the number of ENEM training that received a grade;
• the number of ENEM training essays graded that were followed by a personal discussion with
the teacher.
3. The p-values are for tests of no diﬀerence between eﬀects in both treatment arms are computed
using standard errors clustered at the strata level.
33

Table 1: Design Validity — Balance Across Treatment Arms
Enh. AWE
Pure AWE
Enh. AWE -
p-values (clust. strata)
- Control
- Control
Pure AWE
(2)=0
(3)=0
(4)=0
Obs.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A. ENEM 2018 Cohort
Essay Full Score
-0.020σ
-0.037σ
0.018σ
0.667
0.167
0.691
17,218
(0.045)
(0.026)
(0.044)
Syntactic Skills
-0.013σ
-0.026σ
0.013σ
0.685
0.333
0.743
17,218
(0.033)
(0.027)
(0.039)
Analytical Skills
-0.016σ
-0.04σ
0.024σ
0.719
0.102
0.553
17,218
(0.045
(0.024)
(0.040)
Policy Proposal
-0.023σ
-0.026σ
0.003σ
0.607
0.432
0.955
17,218
(0.045)
(0.032)
(0.046)
Language and Codes
-0.047σ
-0.048σ
0.001σ
0.240
0.184
0.993
17,218
(0.039)
(0.035)
(0.039)
Mathematics
-0.042σ
-0.034σ
-0.007σ
0.264
0.335
0.887
16,349
(0.037)
(0.035)
(0.052)
Natural Sciences
-0.018σ
-0.043σ
0.025σ
0.631
0.319
0.534
16,349
(0.038)
(0.043)
(0.039)
Human Sciences
-0.018σ
-0.041σ
0.023σ
0.622
0.155
0.557
17,218
(0.037)
(0.028)
(0.039)
B. Main Sample Cohort
Baseline Language Score
-0.074σ
0.011σ
-0.080σ
0.146
0.838
0.110
17,739
(0.049)
(0.053)
(0.051)
Baseline Math Score
-0.063σ
-0.059σ
0.001σ
0.403
0.325
0.957
17,739
(0.074)
(0.059)
(0.073)
Joint test (p-value)
0.819
0.802
0.701
Notes: This table investigates balance with respect to student-level variables across experiment arms. Columns 1, 2 and 3 present estimates
and standard errors clustered at the strata-level computed using an ordinary least squares regression with indicators for each of the two
experiment arms and strata indicators. Columns 4, 5 and 6 present p-values testing that the treatment indicators (columns 4 and 5, for
the enhanced AWE ed tech, and the pure AWE ed tech, respectively) and their diﬀerence (column 6) are zero. Column 7 presents the
number of observations used for inference tests for each variable. We also present, in the bottom rows of the table, p-values from a joint
test that all covariates are balanced in each comparison. These p-values are constructed based on equation (7) from Young (2018), taking
into account the randomization protocol. [BACK TO TEXT]
34

Table 2: Design Validity — Treatment Status and Samples’ Attrition
Control
Only Strata FEs
Strata FEs + Controls
Mean
Enhanced
Pure
Enhanced
Pure
AWE
AWE
(2)-(3)
AWE
AWE
(5)-(6)
Obs.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Attrition
Nonoﬃcial ENEM Essay Attriter
0.22
0.016
0.012
0.004
0.007
0.002
0.005
19,516
(0.014)
(0.019)
(0.021)
(0.012)
(0.016)
(0.019)
Students’ Questionnaire Attriter
0.17
0.014
0.018
-0.004
0.007
0.01
-0.003
19,516
(0.010)
(0.012)
(0.016)
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.016)
Oﬃcial ENEM Essay Attriter
0.27
0.001
-0.025
0.026
-0.001
-0.029
0.028
178
(0.024)
(0.028)
(0.032)
(0.025)
(0.028)
(0.032)
Teacher Survey Attriter
0.12
0.076
0.026
0.050
0.072
0.016
0.055
324
(0.043)
(0.043)
(0.055)
(0.043)
(0.044)
(0.054)
End-of-year Student Composition
Not Enrolled in Same
0.01
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
17,872
School in April 2019
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.003)
Notes: This table presents estimates and inference tests for attrition in our main analytical samples. Column 1 presents attrition rates in the control
group and columns 2, 3 and 4 present estimates from speciﬁcation (3), an ordinary least squares regression with indicators for each of the two experiment
arms and strata indicators. In columns 5 to 7, we add to this regression the school-level and individual-level controls available in the beginning of
the year that we use in our main regressions. In these columns, we always include the 2018 ENEM essay average score as a control, after replacing
these observations with the control group school sample mean. Additional controls for the nonoﬃcial ENEM essay and the student’s questionnaire are
the baseline Language and baseline Mathematics proﬁciency scores using data from another state’s standardized exam that happened right before the
treatments were implemented. These controls are also included in the regressions on end-of-year student composition. [BACK TO TEXT]
35

Table 3: Treatments and ENEM Essay Scores
Score, By Skill Group
Full
Syntactic
Analytic
Policy
Score
=
Skills
+
Skills
+
Proposal
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A. Main Eﬀects — Speciﬁcation (1)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
V
0.094σ
0.066σ
0.042σ
0.161σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.030)
(0.026)
(0.028)
(0.034)
p-value, clust. strata
0.003
0.015
0.140
<0.001
p-value, rand. inf
0.005
0.014
0.152
0.001
p-value, MHT adj.
0.005
0.056
0.152
0.006
τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
0.094σ
0.056σ
0.061σ
0.143σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.028)
(0.023)
(0.025)
(0.037)
p-value, clust. strata
0.002
0.020
0.019
0.001
p-value, rand. inf
0.003
0.032
0.016
0.001
p-value, MHT adj.
0.006
0.064
0.048
0.005
MHT Adjustment
Holm
Holm
Holm
Holm
NScores
29,359
29,359
29,359
29,359
NSchools
178
178
178
178
NStrata
33
33
33
33
Panel B. Diﬀerential Eﬀects — Speciﬁcation (2)
τ ∆
ITT
V
0.006σ
0.014σ
−0.011σ
0.021σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.042)
(0.034)
(0.039)
(0.047)
p-value, clust. strata
0.895
0.689
0.772
0.660
p-value, rand. inf
0.896
0.676
0.755
0.670
p-value, MHT adj.
—
0.999
0.755
0.999
MHT Adjustment
Holm
Holm
Holm
Holm
NScores
17,356
17,356
17,356
17,356
NSchools
110
110
110
110
NStrata
33
33
33
33
Notes: This table presents estimates, standard errors and inference tests for the average absolute and diﬀer-
ential intention-to-treat eﬀects of both ed techs on ENEM essay scores. The unit of observation is an essay
written in the oﬃcial 2019 ENEM or in the unoﬃcial ENEM (see Section 4 for details). In Panel A, estimates
are from speciﬁcation (1), an ordinary least squares regression with indicators for each of the two experiment
arms, strata indicators and the school average ENEM essay score for the full essay score in column 1, and for
the speciﬁc group of skills in columns 2, 3 and 4. We also include the following individual-level covariates, as
speciﬁed in the pre-analysis plan: (i) female indicator; (ii) age dummies ranging from 17 or less to 23 or more;
(iii) educational and occupational characteristics of the mother and father of the students; (iv) household
income category; (v) baseline Language and baseline Mathematics proﬁciency scores using data from another
state’s standardized exam that happened right before the treatments were implemented. These covariates are
interacted with the exam indicator to take into account that the set of covariates available for observations
from the 2019 ENEM are diﬀerent from the other exam. We also replace missing school-level and individual-
level continuous covariate values with the control group mean and included an indicator for missing in this
covariate in the regression. For discrete covariates we created a complementary category for missing variables.
In Panel B, estimates are from speciﬁcation (2), where we only use data from treated schools and control for
the student AI-provided grade on the ﬁrst writing activity of the year. We present standard errors clustered
at the strata level in parentheses and three two-sided p-values: p-values obtained using the standard errors
clustered at the strata level; randomization inference p-values using the randomization protocol and 1,000
draws of the assignment with replacement; and Holm (1979) adjusted p-values using the latter. The multiple
hypothesis testing adjustments were made within the cells that have the same shaded background. [BACK
TO TEXT]
36

Table 4: Treatments, Training, Feedback and Individualized Pedagogy
# ENEM essays ...
Annotations were useful?
# ENEM essays ...
Discus. Ind.
Dep. Var.:
Written
Comment.
Somewhat
Very
with
Summary
Annotat.
Useful
Useful
Graded
Teacher
Index
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Panel A. Main Eﬀects — Speciﬁcation (3)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
V
1.35
1.37
0.07
0.06
1.64
0.76
1.02σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.17)
(0.16)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.17)
(0.13)
(0.13)
p-value, clust. strata
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.007
0.001
0.001
0.001
p-value, rand. inf
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
p-value, MHT adj.
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
1.52
1.28
0.06
0.01
1.72
0.90
0.96σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.21)
(0.18)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.19)
(0.14)
(0.15)
p-value, clust. strata
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.585
0.001
0.001
0.001
p-value, rand. inf
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.590
0.001
0.001
0.001
p-value, MHT adj.
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.590
0.001
0.001
0.001
Panel B. Diﬀerential Eﬀects — Speciﬁcation (3)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
−τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
-0.18
0.09
0.01
0.05
-0.08
-0.14
0.06σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.12)
(0.13)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.11)
(0.16)
(0.10)
p-value, clust. strata
0.163
0.457
0.249
0.010
0.459
0.392
0.579
p-value, rand. inf
0.280
0.610
0.220
0.020
0.530
0.400
0.620
p-value, MHT adj.
0.999
0.610
0.999
0.120
0.999
0.999
—
MHT Adjustment
Holm
Holm
Holm
Holm
Holm
Holm
Holm
Control Group Mean
4.89
3.39
0.81
0.44
3.72
2.32
—
Control Group SD
3.17
2.99
0.39
0.50
3.05
2.76
—
NStudents
14,175
14,180
14,151
14,151
14,162
14,123
13,963
NSchools
178
178
178
178
178
178
178
NStrata
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
Notes: This table presents estimates, standard errors and inference tests for the average absolute and diﬀerential intent-to-treat eﬀects of both ed techs
on training behavior and on the quantity and quality of feedback. All outcomes in columns (1) to (6) were collected in the students’ questionnaire in the
state’s standardized exam. In Panel A and B, estimates are from speciﬁcation (3), an ordinary least squares regression with indicators for each of the two
experiment arms, using as controls strata indicators and the school average ENEM essay score for the full essay score in column 1, and for the speciﬁc
group of skills in columns 2, 3 and 4. We also include the following individual-level covariates, as speciﬁed in the pre-analysis plan: (i) female indicator;
(ii) age dummies ranging from 17 or less to 23 or more; (iii) educational and occupational characteristics of the mother and father of the students; (iv)
household income category; (v) baseline Language and baseline Mathematics proﬁciency scores using data from another state’s standardized exam that
happened right before the treatments were implemented. We present standard errors clustered at the strata level in parentheses and three two-sided
p-values: p-values obtained using the standard errors clustered at the strata level; randomization inference p-values using the randomization protocol
and 1,000 draws of the assignment with replacement; and Holm (1979) adjusted p-values using the latter. The multiple hypothesis testing adjustments
were made within the cells that have the same shaded background. The summary index in column (7) is computed based on the procedure suggested by
Anderson (2008) and relies on constructing a positively weighted mean of the standardized outcomes of the observations with non-missing outcomes in
columns (1)-(6). [BACK TO TEXT]
37

Table 5: Treatments and Teachers’ Perception on Time Constraints
Time available to improve
students’ knowledge in ... (1-5 scale)
Dep. Var.:
Writing
Grammar
Literature
Summary
Index
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A. Main Eﬀects — Speciﬁcation (3)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
V
0.30
0.36
0.32
0.26σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.17)
(0.18)
(0.20)
(0.15)
p-value, clust. strata
0.045
0.026
0.061
0.044
p-value, rand. inf
0.049
0.009
0.025
0.043
p-value, MHT adj.
0.196
0.054
0.125
0.086
τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.20)
(0.18)
(0.18)
(0.17)
p-value, clust. strata
0.456
0.521
0.506
0.454
p-value, rand. inf
0.413
0.505
0.533
0.412
p-value, MHT adj.
0.999
0.999
0.533
0.412
Panel B. Diﬀerential Eﬀects — Speciﬁcation (3)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
−τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
0.28
0.36
0.33
0.24σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.20)
(0.15)
(0.23)
(0.17)
p-value, clust. strata
0.173
0.025
0.170
0.154
p-value, rand. inf
0.119
0.040
0.088
0.102
{p-value, MHT adj.}
0.119
0.120
0.176
—
MHT Adjustment
Holm
Holm
Holm
Holm
Control Group Mean
2.67
3.04
2.84
—
Control Group SD
1.2
1.1
1.2
—
NTeachers
280
279
279
279
NSchools
173
173
173
173
NStrata
33
33
33
33
Notes: This table presents estimates and inference tests for the average absolute and diﬀerential treat-
ment eﬀects on Language teachers’ perception on time constraints to improve their students’ abilities.
The unit of observation is a teacher that participated in our endline survey and provided an answer
for the question in each column. Estimates in both panels are from speciﬁcation (3), an ordinary least
squares regression with indicators for each of the two experiment arms, strata dummies, the average
2018 ENEM essay score and dummies for schools for which we don’t observe this average. We present
standard errors clustered at the strata level in parentheses and three upper one-sided p-values: p-values
obtained using the standard errors clustered at the strata level; randomization inference p-values us-
ing the randomization protocol and 1,000 draws of the assignment with replacement; and Holm (1979)
adjusted p-values using the latter. The multiple hypothesis testing adjustments were made within the
cells that have the same shaded background. The summary index in column (4) is computed based on
the procedure suggested by Anderson (2008) for observations with non-missing outcomes in columns
(1)-(3). [BACK TO TEXT]
38

Table 6: Treatments, Labor Supply and Task Time Allocation
Average hours worked weekly per group of task...
Working
Correcting
Correcting
Providing
Share
Dep. Var.:
outside
written
other
Preparing
individual
Non-Rout.
school
essays
homework
classes
support
Tasks
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A. Main Eﬀects — Speciﬁcation (3)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
V
-1.19
-0.47
-0.02
-0.71
-0.71
2.44
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.98)
(0.75)
(0.52)
(1.21)
(0.72)
(2.18)
p-value, clust. strata
0.116
0.539
0.975
0.564
0.328
0.272
p-value, rand. inf
0.117
0.568
0.973
0.489
0.302
0.196
{p-value, MHT adj.}
0.234
0.999
0.973
0.999
0.999
0.392
p-value (diﬀ. in allocation, χ2) = 0.469
τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
-0.15
-0.27
-0.02
0.07
-0.35
1.84
(s.e., clust. strata)
(1.16)
(0.82)
(0.60)
(1.16)
(0.60)
(1.83)
p-value, clust. strata
0.895
0.744
0.978
0.954
0.566
0.323
p-value, rand. inf
0.873
0.756
0.979
0.946
0.537
0.278
{p-value, MHT adj.}
0.873
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.278
p-value (diﬀ. in allocation, χ2) = 0.982
Panel B. Diﬀerential Eﬀects — Speciﬁcation (3)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
−τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
-1.03
-0.20
0.01
-0.77
-0.37
0.60
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.90)
(0.84)
(0.67)
(1.19)
(0.63)
(2.19)
p-value, clust. strata
0.258
0.815
0.999
0.519
0.568
0.786
p-value, rand. inf
0.189
0.779
0.996
0.458
0.462
0.758
p-value, MHT adj.
—
0.999
0.996
0.999
0.999
p-value (diﬀ. in allocation, χ2) = 0.628
MHT Adjustment
Holm
Holm
Holm
Holm
Holm
Holm
Control Group Mean
6.14
6.05
3.82
10.19
3.14
37.2
Control Group SD
5.88
5.41
3.29
6.97
4.50
10.6
NTeachers
270
264
270
273
265
262
NSchools
173
173
173
173
173
173
NStrata
33
33
33
33
33
33
Notes: This table presents estimates and inference tests for the average absolute and diﬀerential treatment eﬀects on Language teachers’
labor supply (in total and outside schools) and time allocation across diﬀerent types of tasks. All outcomes were initially elicited in hours
and then winsorized at the top 1%. The unit of observation is a teacher that participated in our endline survey and provided an answer for
the question in each column. Estimates in both panels are from speciﬁcation (3), an ordinary least squares regression with indicators for
each of the two experiment arms, strata dummies, the average 2018 ENEM essay score and dummies for schools for which we don’t observe
this average. We present standard errors clustered at the strata level in parentheses and three two-sided (upper one-sided, in column 1)
p-values: p-values obtained using the standard errors clustered at the strata level; randomization inference p-values using the randomization
protocol and 1,000 draws of the assignment with replacement; and Holm (1979) adjusted p-values using the latter. The multiple hypothesis
testing adjustments were made within the cells that have the same shaded background. [BACK TO TEXT]
39

Table 7: Treatments and Future Education
Dep. Var.:
Share
Plans for
admitted
2020 include
Summary
PSE 2020
PSE
Index
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A. Main Eﬀects — Speciﬁcation (3)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
V
4.95
0.01
0.41σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(4.22)
(0.01)
(0.47)
p-value, clust. strata
0.250
0.652
0.390
p-value, rand. inf
0.201
0.602
0.344
{p-value, MHT adj.}
0.804
0.999
0.688
τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
1.86
0.01
0.32σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(4.20)
(0.01)
(0.43)
p-value, clust. strata
0.661
0.687
0.468
p-value, rand. inf
0.619
0.609
0.379
{p-value, MHT adj.}
0.619
0.999
0.379
Panel B. Diﬀerential Eﬀects — Speciﬁcation (3)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
−τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
3.09
0.01
0.10σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(4.70)
(0.02)
(0.60)
p-value, clust. strata
0.516
0.957
0.874
p-value, rand. inf
0.455
0.953
0.843
{p-value, MHT adj.}
0.999
0.953
—
MHT Adjustment
Holm
Holm
Holm
Control Group Mean
41.06
0.73
—
Control Group SD
22.73
0.44
—
Regression Level
Teacher
Student
School
N
272
14,152
163
Notes: This table presents estimates and inference tests for the average absolute and
diﬀerential treatment eﬀects Language teachers’ expectations with respect to admission
into PSE and and on students’ aspirations with respect to post-secondary education
(PSE). The unit of observation is a a teacher that participated in our endline survey and
provided an answer for the question in column (1) and a student in experimental schools
who participated in the state’s standardized test in 2019 and provided a valid answer
in column (2). Estimates in both panels are from speciﬁcation (3), an ordinary least
squares regression with indicators for each of the two experiment arms, strata dummies,
the average 2018 ENEM essay score and dummies for schools for which we don’t observe
this average and other individual-level controls we are able to link to students in our
data. We present standard errors clustered at the strata level in parentheses and three
two-sided p-values: p-values obtained using the standard errors clustered at the strata
level; randomization inference p-values using the randomization protocol and 1,000 draws
of the assignment with replacement; and Holm (1979) adjusted p-values using the latter.
The multiple hypothesis testing adjustments were made within the cells that have the
same shaded background. The summary index in column 3 is computed based on the
procedure suggested by Anderson (2008) and relies on constructing a positively weighted
mean of the standardized outcomes of the observations with non-missing outcomes in
columns 1 and 2. Since we cannot link students’ answers in the questionnaire with the
teacher data, we collapse both answers at the school level in order to compute estimates
on the summary index. [BACK TO TEXT]
40

Table 8: Treatments and Knowledge About Students
How much feels knows strengths
and weaknesses of students (1-10 scale)...
Pred. - Real
Summary
Dep. Var.:
Writing
Grammar
Literature
2019 Essay
Index
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A. Main Eﬀects — Speciﬁcation (3)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
V
0.05
-0.17
0.08
2.2
0.54σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.18)
(0.21)
(0.19)
(24.0)
(0.95)
p-value, clust. strata
0.782
0.410
0.682
0.928
0.573
p-value, rand. inf.
0.834
0.442
0.702
0.914
0.552
{p-value, MHT adj.}
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.552
τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
0.01
-0.24
0.04
-30.3
−0.57σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.17)
(0.21)
(0.25)
(21.9)
(0.69)
p-value, clust. strata
0.978
0.257
0.873
0.176
0.415
p-value, rand. inf.
0.983
0.289
0.884
0.132
0.498
{p-value, MHT adj.}
0.983
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.999
Panel B. Diﬀerential Eﬀects — Speciﬁcation (3)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
−τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
0.05
0.07
0.04
32.5
1.11σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.23)
(0.29)
(0.32)
(20.4)
(0.90)
p-value, clust. strata
0.813
0.812
0.906
0.121
0.227
p-value, rand. inf.
0.828
0.786
0.891
0.071
0.229
{p-value, MHT adj.}
0.999
0.999
0.891
0.284
—
MHT Adjustment
Holm
Holm
Holm
Holm
Holm
Control Group Mean
8.19
8.34
7.98
85.6
—
Control Group SD
1.32
1.19
1.38
125.7
—
Regression Level
Teacher
Teacher
Teacher
School
School
N
279
278
278
164
164
Notes: This table presents estimates and inference tests for the average absolute and diﬀerential treatment eﬀects on teachers’
perceptions on how much they know about the strengths and weaknesses of their students in writing essays, and on Grammar and
Literature, in a scale of 1 to 10 (columns 1 to 3) and on the absolute diﬀerence between teachers’ predicted average grade of their
students in public schools in the written essay of ENEM 2019 and the actual average grade in the exam’s essay, at the school level
(column 4). The unit of observation in columns 1 to 3 is a teacher that participated in our endline survey and provided an answer for
the question in each column. Estimates in both panels are from speciﬁcation (3), an ordinary least squares regression with indicators
for each of the two experiment arms, strata dummies, the average 2018 ENEM essay score and dummies for schools for which we don’t
observe this average. We present standard errors clustered at the strata level in parentheses and three two-sided p-values: p-values
obtained using the standard errors clustered at the strata level; randomization inference p-values using the randomization protocol and
1,000 draws of the assignment with replacement; and Holm (1979) adjusted p-values using the latter. The multiple hypothesis testing
adjustments were made within the cells that have the same shaded background. The summary index in column 5 is computed based
on the procedure suggested by Anderson (2008) and relies on constructing a positively weighted mean of the standardized outcomes
of the observations with non-missing outcomes in columns 1 to 4, after collapsing the data at the school level using the number of
student’s of each teachers as weights for variables in columns 1 to 3. [BACK TO TEXT]
41

Table 9: Treatments and Secondary Outcomes
Scores in
Scores in
Scores in
Dep. Var.:
Writing
Language
Non-Language
(Narrative
Related
Related
Biography)
Tests
Tests
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A. Main Eﬀects — Speciﬁcation (3)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
V
−0.001σ
−0.007σ
0.001σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.035)
(0.021)
(0.021)
p-value, clust. strata
0.974
0.756
0.950
p-value, rand. inf
0.973
0.730
0.951
p-value, MHT adj.
0.973
0.999
0.999
τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
0.041σ
−0.001σ
0.005σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.044)
(0.023)
(0.019)
p-value, clust. strata
0.361
0.960
0.807
p-value, rand. inf
0.352
0.969
0.862
p-value, MHT adj.
0.999
0.999
0.999
Panel B. Diﬀerential Eﬀects — Speciﬁcation (3)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
−τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
−0.042σ
−0.006σ
−0.003σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.037)
(0.029)
(0.024)
p-value, clust. strata
0.267
0.850
0.892
p-value, rand. inf
0.355
0.812
0.891
p-value, MHT adj.
0.999
0.999
0.908
MHT Adjustment
Holm
Holm
Holm
NScores
15,032
30,608
90,198
Notes: This table presents estimates and inference tests for the average absolute and diﬀerential treat-
ment eﬀects on secondary outcomes. In column 1, the outcome is the standardized grade in a narrative
essay administered at the same day as the unoﬃcial ENEM. In column 2, we pool standardized scores
in the ENEM 2019 Language and Codes test and the PAEBES 2019 Language (reading) exam ad-
ministered by SEDU/ES. In column 3, we pool standardized scores in the ENEM 2019 Mathematics,
Natural Sciences, Human Sciences tests, and the PAEBES 2019 Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry
standardized exams.
Estimates in both panels are from speciﬁcation (1), an ordinary least squares
regression with indicators for each of the two experiment arms, strata indicators and the school average
ENEM 2018 scores related to each family of outcomes. We also include the following individual-level
covariates, as speciﬁed in the pre-analysis plan: (i) female indicator; (ii) age dummies ranging from 17
or less to 23 or more; (iii) educational and occupational characteristics of the mother and father of the
students; (iv) household income category; (v) baseline Language and baseline Mathematics proﬁciency
scores using data from another state’s standardized exam that happened right before the treatments
were implemented. These covariates are interacted with the exam indicator to take into account that the
set of covariates available for observations from the 2019 ENEM are diﬀerent from the other exam. We
also replace missing school-level and individual-level continuous covariate values with the control group
mean and included an indicator for missing in this covariate in the regression. For discrete covariates
we created a complementary category for missing variables. We present standard errors clustered at
the strata level in parentheses and three two-sided p-values: p-values obtained using the standard errors
clustered at the strata level; randomization inference p-values using the randomization protocol and
1,000 draws of the assignment with replacement; and Holm (1979) adjusted p-values using the latter.
The multiple hypothesis testing adjustments were made within the cells that have the same shaded
background. [BACK TO TEXT]
42

Appendix A
Supplementary Material
Figure A.1: Treatment Eﬀects on Scores (Adm. and Primary Data)
Oﬃcial ENEM 2019 Essay
p−value=0.538
p−value=0.812
p−value=0.152
p−value=0.802
Full
Syntactic
Analytic
Policy
Proposal
Null Hypothesis: ITTs in both ed techs are equal
−.25
−.2
−.15
−.1
−.05
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
.25
.3
ITT Estimate (90% CI), in Standard Deviations
Outcome: Full Score and Score in Each Skill Group
Enhanced AWE ed tech
Pure AWE ed tech
Nonoﬃcial ENEM 2019 Essay
p−value=0.701
p−value=0.493
p−value=0.871
p−value=0.695
Full
Syntactic
Analytic
Policy
Proposal
Null Hypothesis: ITTs in both ed techs are equal
−.25
−.2
−.15
−.1
−.05
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
.25
.3
ITT Estimate (90% CI), in Standard Deviations
Outcome: Full Score and Score in Each Skill Group
Enhanced AWE ed tech
Pure AWE ed tech
Notes: This ﬁgure replicates the main results of the paper by using each set of data
on scores separately. The speciﬁcation and controls included are the same as in Table
3 and Figure 3 [BACK TO TEXT]
43

Table A.1: Descriptive Statistics, Sample Selection and Balance Tests
Sample Selection
Balance
Esp´ırito
Exper.
t-test
Control
AWE
Stand.
(4)=(5)
(4)=(6)
(5)=(6)
All eq.
Santo
Sample
p-value
Schools
Schools
Schools
p-value
p-value
p-value
p-value
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
ENEM 2018
Written Essay
457.0
476.0
0.066
480.2
470.9
476.5
0.260
0.596
0.677
0.530
(180.4)
(176.3)
(175.1)
(177.2)
(176.7)
Formal written
113.6
117.2
0.023
117.9
116.4
117.2
0.428
0.538
0.924
0.692
norm
(33.9)
(32.2)
(31.9)
(32.5)
(32.4)
Argumentative
108.6
111.8
0.082
112.6
111.1
111.8
0.377
0.717
0.646
0.675
structure
(35.5)
(34.2)
(33.7)
(34.7)
(34.2)
Conformity
88.5
92.8
0.075
93.6
91.7
92.9
0.242
0.677
0.566
0.499
(47.4)
(47.4)
(47.5)
(47.4)
(47.1)
POV construction
83.6
87.9
0.074
88.9
86.6
88.2
0.136
0.645
0.448
0.319
(44.6)
(44.3)
(44.3)
(44.3)
(44.3)
Policy Proposal
62.7
66.3
0.154
67.3
65.0
66.4
0.461
0.551
0.972
0.731
(47.7)
(48.0)
(47.9)
(47.9)
(48.4)
(cont.)
44

Language and Codes
500.7
509.8
0.022
512.4
507.3
509.4
0.200
0.260
0.993
0.398
(66.6)
(66.1)
(66.7)
(65.7)
(65.6)
Mathematics
511.8
518.2
0.119
521.7
514.8
517.6
0.389
0.342
0.828
0.576
(86.1)
(85.9)
(87.8)
(84.1)
(85.3)
Natural Sciences
474.5
478.3
0.255
480.5
475.0
479.2
0.282
0.676
0.496
0.537
(60.6)
(60.7)
(61.7)
(60.1)
(60.0)
Human Sciences
545.6
553.8
0.048
555.9
550.5
555.0
0.256
0.682
0.519
0.502
(76.7)
(74.4)
(74.3)
(74.7)
(74.1)
Other covariates
Number of employees
46.7
73.3
0.001
73.8
75.7
70.3
0.510
0.538
0.233
0.489
(24.0)
(26.1)
(21.8)
(30.6)
(26.3)
Number of classrooms
9.4
14.0
<0.001
13.7
13.8
14.5
0.830
0.443
0.591
0.743
(4.1)
(4.9)
(3.8)
(4.3)
(6.5)
Broadband Internet
0.80
0.93
0.004
0.92
0.91
0.96
0.794
0.544
0.447
0.712
(0.40)
(0.25)
(0.27)
(0.29)
(0.19)
Average age (Language teachers)
39.6
41.6
0.001
41.7
41.3
41.7
0.731
0.984
0.741
0.925
(4.8)
(4.4)
(4.7)
(4.2)
(4.1)
Share of teachers
0.02
0.04
0.049
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.998
0.814
0.809
0.965
holding a Masters’ degree
(0.08)
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.08)
(0.12)
Share of blacks, “pardos” or
0.58
0.62
0.095
0.61
0.64
0.62
0.437
0.784
0.563
0.730
indigenous
(0.22)
(0.17)
(0.19)
(0.17)
(0.16)
Share women
0.50
0.52
<0.001
0.52
0.52
0.52
0.697
0.528
0.324
0.608
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
Latitude
-19.9
-20.0
0.124
-20.0
-20.0
-20.0
0.098
0.342
0.312
0.254
(0.8)
(0.8)
(0.8)
(0.7)
(0.7)
Longitude
-40.7
-40.6
0.148
-40.6
-40.6
-40.6
0.240
0.517
0.526
0.500
(0.5)
(0.5)
(0.5)
(0.4)
(0.4)
Rural
0.19
0.01
<0.001
0
0.02
0
0.246
0.708
0.255
0.497
(0.39)
(0.08)
-
(0.14)
-
Joint test (p-value)
0.905
0.825
0.568
Number of Observations
276
178
68
55
55
Notes: Mean and standard deviation (in parentheses) of school-level characteristics in the rows are presented in columns (1), (2), (4), (5) and (6). Statistics are for all state
schools in Esp´ırito Santo with at least one high school classroom in column (1), for the experimental sample of schools in column (2), for the control group of schools in column
(3), for the standard program in column (4) and for the alternative treatment in column (5). Column (3) presents p-values for t-tests comparing the groups in columns (1)
and (2). In columns (7)-(10), we present p−values for t−tests comparing the groups of experimental schools, indicated in the header of each column. The p−values are from
regressions with strata ﬁxed-eﬀects, using standard errors clustered at the school level in the ﬁrst two groups of variables and using robust standard errors in the third group
of variables. The number of schools in the experimental sample is 178 but there were 6 (2) schools in the experimental sample that did not have students applying for ENEM
in 2017 (2018), and 4 schools that opened in 2019 (the number of observations thus varies across groups of covariates). The written essay in 2017 has a superscript s because
this variable was used for stratiﬁcation. We did not use the 2018 data for stratiﬁcation purposes because the public microdata was still not available when we performed the
randomization. We also present p-values from a joint test that all covariates are balanced in each comparison. These p-values are constructed based on equation (7) from
Young (2018), taking into account the randomization protocol. All p-values lower than 0.10 are in bold.
45

Table A.2: Design Validity — Balance Across Treatment Arms (Conditional on Non-missing in the Nonoﬃcial ENEM essay)
Control
Enhanc. AWE
Pure AWE
Enhan. AWE -
p-values (clust. strata)
Mean
- Control
- Control
Pure AWE
(2)=0
(3)=0
(4)=0
Obs.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Baseline Language
0.062
-0.064
0.002
-0.065
0.212
0.975
0.201
14,400
Score
(0.05)
(0.049)
(0.05)
Baseline Mathematics
0.056
-0.043
-0.064
0.021
0.601
0.286
0.783
14,400
Score
(0.081)
(0.059)
(0.077)
Male
0.439
-0.001
-0.016
0.015
0.917
0.118
0.149
14,257
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
Age Range
Age up to 17
0.53
-0.008
0.009
-0.018
0.718
0.576
0.301
14,123
(0.022)
(0.017)
(0.017)
Aged 18
0.37
-0.01
-0.015
0.005
0.635
0.412
0.742
14,123
(0.021)
(0.018)
(0.014)
Aged 19
0.081
0.016
0.002
0.014
0.007
0.797
0.12
14,123
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.009)
Aged 20 +
0.019
0.003
0.004
-0.001
0.433
0.340
0.857
14,123
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.005)
Mothers’ Education
Mother has incomplete primary
0.075
0.013
0.015
-0.002
0.129
0.076
0.853
14,230
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.01)
Mother has complete primary
0.196
0.011
0.012
0
0.318
0.481
0.977
14,230
(0.011)
(0.016)
(0.015)
Mother HS dropout
0.15
0.005
0.003
0.002
0.613
0.733
0.765
14,230
(0.01)
(0.009)
(0.007)
Mother completed HS
0.357
-0.022
-0.031
0.009
0.188
0.084
0.649
14,230
(0.016)
(0.017)
(0.02)
Mother completed PSE
0.092
-0.01
0.008
-0.018
0.257
0.451
0.041
14,230
(0.008)
(0.011)
(0.008)
Mother has more than PSE
0.056
-0.005
-0.005
0
0.406
0.311
0.986
14,230
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.007)
(cont.)
46

Control
Enhanc. AWE
Pure AWE
Enhan. AWE -
p-values (clust. strata)
Mean
- Control
- Control
Pure AWE
(2)=0
(3)=0
(4)=0
Obs.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Fathers’ Education
Father has incomplete primary
0.092
0.006
0.006
0
0.435
0.495
0.971
14,217
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.01)
Father has complete primary
0.203
0.014
0.015
-0.001
0.339
0.347
0.964
14,217
(0.014)
(0.015)
(0.016)
Father HS dropout
0.145
-0.005
-0.001
-0.004
0.455
0.9
0.575
14,217
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.008)
Father completed HS
0.294
-0.005
-0.012
0.008
0.7
0.46
0.673
14,217
(0.012)
(0.016)
(0.018)
Father completed PSE
0.063
-0.009
-0.003
-0.006
0.266
0.747
0.371
14,217
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.007)
Father has more than PSE
0.023
-0.005
-0.001
-0.005
0.12
0.796
0.139
14,217
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
p-value of joint test
0.746
0.861
0.470
Notes: This table investigates balance with and student-level variables across experiment arms for students that participated in the nonoﬃcial ENEM essay. Column 1 presents means
and standard deviations (in brackets) of variables listed in rows. Columns 2 and 3 present estimates and standard errors clustered at the strata-level computed using speciﬁcation (3),
an ordinary least squares regression with indicators for each of the two experiment arms and strata indicators. We use these estimates to test for diﬀerences between the enhanced
AWE and the pure AWE treatments and report the point estimate and standard error in column 4. Column 5 presents the number of observations used for inference tests for each
variable in columns 5 to 8 [BACK TO TEXT].
47

Table A.3: Design Validity — Balance Across Treatment Arms (Conditional on Complying with Oﬃcial ENEM essay)
Control
Enhanc. AWE
Pure AWE
Enhan. AWE -
p-values (clust. strata)
Mean
- Control
- Control
Pure AWE
(2)=0
(3)=0
(4)=0
Obs.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Male
0.423
-0.007
-0.022
0.015
0.444
0.078
0.239
14,268
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.013)
Age Range
Age up to 17
0.374
-0.011
0.01
-0.021
0.641
0.653
0.242
14,268
(0.024)
(0.021)
(0.017)
Aged 18
0.45
-0.009
-0.028
0.019
0.658
0.119
0.232
14,268
(0.019)
(0.017)
(0.016)
Aged 19
0.127
0.008
-0.001
0.009
0.401
0.91
0.325
14,268
(0.009)
(0.011)
(0.009)
Aged 20 +
0.049
0.012
0.02
-0.008
0.18
0.064
0.458
14,268
(0.009)
(0.01)
(0.01)
Mothers’ Education
Mother has incomplete primary
0.195
0.011
0.008
0.003
0.431
0.59
0.865
14,268
(0.013)
(0.014)
(0.017)
Mother has complete primary
0.177
0.007
0.005
0.002
0.548
0.673
0.886
14,268
(0.011)
(0.012)
(0.013)
Mother HS dropout
0.151
-0.003
-0.008
0.005
0.675
0.394
0.523
14,268
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.008)
Mother completed HS
0.309
-0.011
-0.012
0
0.306
0.445
0.993
14,268
(0.011)
(0.015)
(0.015)
Mother completed PSE
0.044
-0.006
0.001
-0.008
0.246
0.818
0.065
14,268
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.004)
Mother has more than PSE
0.025
-0.005
-0.001
-0.004
0.045
0.657
0.262
14,268
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.003)
Notes: (cont.)
48

Control
Enhanc. AWE
Pure AWE
Enhan. AWE -
p-values (clust. strata)
Mean
- Control
- Control
Pure AWE
(2)=0
(3)=0
(4)=0
Obs.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Fathers’ Education
Father has incomplete primary
0.14
0.024
0.007
0.016
0.054
0.588
0.266
14,268
(0.012)
(0.014)
(0.014)
Father has complete primary
0.155
0.014
0.016
-0.002
0.11
0.166
0.843
14,268
(0.008)
(0.011)
(0.012)
Father HS dropout
0.17
-0.002
-0.003
0.001
0.775
0.739
0.888
14,268
(0.008)
(0.01)
(0.006)
Father completed HS
0.363
-0.024
-0.009
-0.015
0.088
0.62
0.429
14,268
(0.014)
(0.018)
(0.019)
Father completed PSE
0.066
-0.007
-0.01
0.003
0.322
0.16
0.639
14,268
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.006)
Father has more than PSE
0.071
-0.004
0.003
-0.007
0.57
0.638
0.332
14,268
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.007)
HH Income Category
Category 1
0.239
0.005
-0.009
0.014
0.767
0.493
0.463
14268
(0.018)
(0.013)
(0.019)
Category 2
0.31
0.016
0.015
0.001
0.151
0.252
0.971
14268
(0.011)
(0.013)
(0.015)
Category 3
0.239
-0.004
0.01
-0.014
0.686
0.400
0.301
14268
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.013)
Category 4
0.212
-0.017
-0.016
-0.001
0.274
0.257
0.952
14268
(0.016)
(0.014)
(0.014)
Notes: (cont.)
49

Control
Enhanc. AWE
Pure AWE
Enhan. AWE -
p-values (clust. strata)
Mean
- Control
- Control
Pure AWE
(2)=0
(3)=0
(4)=0
Obs.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Mothers’ Occupation
Low Skill
0.695
0.025
0.011
0.014
0.111
0.453
0.391
14,268
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.016)
Medium Skill 15
0.158
-0.024
0.002
-0.026
0.023
0.910
0.047
14,268
(0.01)
(0.014)
(0.013)
High Skill
0.019
-0.004
0.001
-0.004
0.145
0.829
0.092
14,268
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.003)
Fathers’ Occupation
Low Skill
0.712
0.01
0.008
0.002
0.316
0.57
0.864
14,268
(0.01)
(0.013)
(0.014)
Medium Skill 15
0.186
-0.01
-0.002
-0.008
0.301
0.891
0.495
14,268
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.012)
High Skill
0.011
-0.004
-0.002
-0.002
0.067
0.267
0.452
14,268
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
p-value of joint test
0.910
0.161
0.197
Notes: This table investigates balance with and student-level variables across experiment arms for students that participated in the oﬃcial 2019 ENEM essay. Column 1 presents means
and standard deviations (in brackets) of variables listed in rows. Columns 2 and 3 present estimates and standard errors clustered at the strata-level computed using speciﬁcation (3),
an ordinary least squares regression with indicators for each of the two experiment arms and strata indicators. We use these estimates to test for diﬀerences between the enhanced
AWE and the pure AWE treatments and report the point estimate and standard error in column 4. Column 8 presents the number of observations used for inference tests for each
variable in columns 5 to 8. [BACK TO TEXT]
50

Table A.4: Treatments, Collective Training and Feedback (Teacher Survey)
Teachers — Assignments, Grades
and Collective Feedback
# ENEM Essays...
Dep. Var.:
Assign.
Assign.
Graded
Discuss.
Discuss.
Summary
in class
good
bad
Index
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A. Main Eﬀects — Speciﬁcation (3)
\
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
-0.13
0.19
0.51
0.76
0.41
0.16σ
p-value, clust. strata
0.526
0.442
0.351
0.322
0.372
0.282
[p-value, rand. inf.]
0.493
0.419
0.307
0.267
0.312
0.208
{p-value, MHT adj.}
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.999
{0.208}
\
τ Pure AWE
ITT
-0.44
1.13
0.30
0.45
0.58
0.25σ
p-value, clust. strata
0.607
0.213
0.425
0.380
0.325
0.191
p-value, rand. inf.
0.630
0.213
0.448
0.384
0.350
0.192
p-value, MHT adj.
0.630
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.3844
Panel B. Diﬀerential Eﬀects — Speciﬁcation (3)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
−τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
0.31
−0.94
0.21
0.31
−0.16
−0.09σ
(p-value, clust. strata)
0.870
0.502
0.889
0.832
0.897
0.768
[p-value, rand. inf.]
0.797
0.352
0.863
0.782
0.869
0.715
{p-value, MHT adj.}
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.869
—
MHT Adjustment
Holm
Holm
Holm
Holm
Holm
Holm
Control Group Mean
16.5
10.3
13.2
9.9
11.5
—
Control Group SD
12.2
9.4
10.8
7.6
9.7
—
NTeachers
271
270
269
260
267
259
Notes: This table presents estimates and inference tests for the average absolute and diﬀerential average treatment eﬀects
on the: amount of writing that teachers assigned to students to train for the ENEM essay during the year and on the
amount of collective feedback that they gave back to students. All outcomes in columns (1) to (5) were initially elicited as
an open-ended question on the number of essays and then winsorized at the top 1%, as speciﬁed in the pre-analysis plan.
The unit of observation in columns (1) to (6) is a teacher that participated in our end-line survey and provided an answer for
the question in each column. Estimates in both panels are from speciﬁcation (3), an ordinary least squares regression with
indicators for each of the two experiment arms and strata dummies. We present three upper one-sided p-values below each
coeﬃcient in Panel A and three two-sided p-values below each coeﬃcient in Panel B: p-values obtained using the standard
errors clustered at the at the strata level, in parentheses; randomization inference p-values using the randomization protocol
and 1,000 draws of the assignment with replacement, in brackets; and Holm (1979) adjusted p-values using the latter, in
curly brackets. These adjustments were made within the cells that have the same shaded background. The summary index
in columns (6) is computed based on the procedure suggested by Anderson (2008) and relies on constructing a positively
weighted mean of the standardized outcomes of the observations with non-missing outcomes in columns (1)-(5). [BACK
TO TEXT]
51

Figure A.2: Treatments and the Distribution of Perceptions on Time
0
10
20
30
40
50
Percent of Teachers
1
2
3
4
5
Perception on Time Available to Improve Writing
Enhanced AWE ed tech
Control
0
10
20
30
40
50
Percent of Teachers
1
2
3
4
5
Perception on Time Available to Improve Writing
Pure AWE ed tech
Control
[BACK TO TEXT]
1.
This ﬁgure plots the distribution of the index on the subjective
perceptions of teachers on how constrained they feel to improve their
students’ abilities on writing using the time available inside and
outside the classroom.
The upper ﬁgure compares teachers using the
enhanced AWE ed tech and the control group, whereas the bottom ﬁg-
ure compares teachers using the pure AWE ed tech and the control group.
2.
The possible answers in this question followed a 5-point Likert
scale and ranged from “Time very insuﬃcient” to “Time more than
suﬃcient”.
52

Table A.5: Lee Bounds on Teachers’ Signiﬁcant Treatment Eﬀects
ITT
Lee Bounds
Coeﬀ.
Lower
Upper
(1)
(2)
(3)
Time Available For...
(Table 5)
Writing
0.30
0.10
0.52
(s.e, clust. strata)
(0.17)
(0.23)
(0.19)
Grammar
0.36
0.05
0.49
(s.e, clust. strata)
(0.18)
(0.20)
(0.20)
Literature
0.32
0.08
0.50
(s.e, clust. strata)
(0.20)
(0.20)
(0.20)
Summary Index
0.26σ
−0.17σ
0.44σ
(s.e, clust. strata)
(0.15)
(0.14)
(0.15)
Average Hours Worked Weekly... (Table 6
column 1)
Outside School
-1.19
-1.33
1.03
(s.e, clust. strata)
(0.98)
(0.89)
(0.86)
Notes: This table depicts the original coeﬃcients and standard errors from Tables
5 and 6 (column 1), lower (column 2) and upper (column 3) Lee (2009) bounds
on signiﬁcant coeﬃcients arising from the analysis of the absolute eﬀects enhanced
AWE ed tech using equation (1). The dependent variable is listed in the rows of
the table. The speciﬁcation used to compute the bounds does not include strata
ﬁxed eﬀects nor controls. Bootstrapped standard errors using 500 replications are
in parentheses for columns 2 and 3. [BACK TO TEXT]
53

Table A.6: Heterogeneity in Treatment Eﬀects
Socio-economic (HH Income)
Gender
Status
Race
Heterog. Margin:
Below
Above
White
Non-White
Boys
Girls
Median
Median
or Asian
nor Asian
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
V
0.073σ
0.114σ
0.098σ
0.087σ
0.145σ
0.096σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.033)
(0.038)
(0.035)
(0.037)
(0.035)
(0.042)
p-value diﬀ., clust. strata
0.387
0.568
0.245
p-value diﬀ., MHT adj.
0.999
0.999
0.999
τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
0.079σ
0.108σ
0.143σ
0.097σ
0.089σ
0.087σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.034)
(0.035)
(0.035)
(0.037)
(0.035)
(0.042)
p-value diﬀ., clust. strata
0.631
0.324
0.865
p-value diﬀ., MHT adj.
0.999
0.999
0.999
Shift
Quartiles of Baseline Language Achievement
Heterog. Margin:
Full
Non-Full
Quartile
Quartile
Quartile
Quartile
Shift
Shift
1
2
3
4
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
V
0.298σ
0.086σ
0.044σ
0.154σ
0.119σ
0.145σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.171)
(0.046)
(0.052)
(0.060)
(0.056)
(0.066)
p-value diﬀ., clust. strata
0.175
0.158
p-value diﬀ., MHT adj.
0.999
0.999
τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
0.300σ
0.080σ
0.031σ
0.120σ
0.123σ
0.101σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.089)
(0.037)
(0.041)
(0.049)
(0.048)
(0.053)
p-value diﬀ., clust. strata
0.999
0.201
p-value diﬀ., MHT adj.
0.999
0.999
Number of Classes
Taught (Teacher)
Heterog. Margin:
Above
Below
Median
Median
(13)
(14)
τ Enhanced AWE
ITT
V
0.088σ
0.116σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.058)
(0.058)
p-value diﬀ., clust. strata
0.715
p-value diﬀ., MHT adj.
0.999
τ Pure AWE
ITT
V
0.182σ
0.060σ
(s.e., clust. strata)
(0.057)
(0.042)
p-value diﬀ., clust. strata
0.099
p-value diﬀ., MHT adj.
0.999
Notes: This table presents estimates and inference tests for the average absolute and diﬀerential treatment eﬀects on sub-samples singled
out in the pre-analysis plan. Estimates are from speciﬁcation (1), an ordinary least squares regression with indicators for each of the two
experiment arms, strata dummies, ans the controls listed in the footnotes to table 3. We present standard errors clustered at the strata level
in parentheses and two-sided p-values comparing whether the eﬀects are equal in the sub-samples: p-values obtained using the standard
errors clustered at the strata level; and Holm (1979) adjusted p-values using the latter. The multiple hypothesis testing adjustments were
made within the cells that have the same shaded background. [BACK TO TEXT]
54
