 
 
 
Human–Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. 
 
Designing for human–AI complementarity in K-12 education  
Kenneth Holstein and Vincent Aleven 
 
Abstract:  
Recent work has explored how complementary strengths of humans and artificial intelligence (AI) 
systems might be productively combined. However, successful forms of human–AI partnership 
have rarely been demonstrated in real-world settings. We present the iterative design and 
evaluation of Lumilo, smart glasses that help teachers help their students in AI-supported 
classrooms by presenting real-time analytics about students’ learning, metacognition, and 
behavior. Results from a field study conducted in K-12 classrooms indicate that students learn 
more when teachers and AI tutors work together during class. We discuss implications of this 
research for the design of human–AI partnerships. We argue for more participatory approaches to 
research and design in this area, in which practitioners and other stakeholders are deeply, 
meaningfully involved throughout the process. Furthermore, we advocate for theory-building and 
for principled approaches to the study of human–AI decision-making in real-world contexts. 
 
 
Artificial intelligence (AI) systems are increasingly used to support human work in deeply social 
contexts such as education, healthcare, social work, and criminal justice. In these contexts, AI can 
automate routine parts of practitioners’ work, while freeing up their time for activities they find 
more meaningful (17, 28, 39). AI can also help to scale up the delivery of social services and help 
humans make more informed and equitable decisions (5, 16, 28). Despite these benefits, modern 
AI systems are fallible and imperfect. If not carefully designed, AI risks rigidly scaling practices 
without sensitivity to local context, propagating harmful inequities, or automating away valuable 
human–human interactions (1, 4, 8, 18). To ensure that these systems do more good than harm, it 
is critical they are designed to bring out the best of human ability while also helping to overcome 
human limitations. 
 
A rich line of research has explored the design of effective human–AI partnerships: 
configurations of humans and AI systems that draw upon the strengths of each (6, 16, 19, 22, 36). 
Such integrations of human and machine intelligence have sometimes been shown to be more 
effective than AI or humans working alone (4, 16, 20, 28). For example, successful partnerships 
have been demonstrated in radiology, where human radiologists and AI systems working 
collaboratively exhibited higher diagnostic performance than either in isolation (28). By contrast, 
in many studies, human–AI collaboration has failed to improve or even harmed task performance 
(8, 29, 35). For instance, Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al. (29), found that increasing human visibility into 
the way a machine learning model makes predictions had the effect of decreasing rather than 
increasing humans' ability to detect and correct for model errors, apparently due to cognitive 
overload. Similarly, Green & Chen (8) found that including crowdworkers in the loop in a criminal 
risk assessment task led to worse predictive performance than a model operating alone. 
So, why do some human–AI partnerships succeed, while others fail? Oftentimes, 
partnerships fail due to a lack of human-centered design – for example, where humans are unable 
to usefully interpret what the AI system is telling them or are overwhelmed by the manner in which 
the information is presented (29, 35). In other cases, partnerships may fail due to ineffective 
pairings, where there is simply no reason to expect, upfront, that humans and AI systems will have 

 
2 
 
complementary strengths to build upon. For example, many null or negative results have come 
from studies on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, where crowdworkers assist an AI on tasks that truly 
require expert-level domain knowledge, which we cannot expect an average crowdworker to have 
(4, 24). Finally, as demonstrated in recent work, human–AI partnerships may sometimes appear 
to fail due to inappropriate evaluations. For example, Buçinca et al. (3) observed that empirical 
studies of human–AI partnerships rarely evaluate performance on actual decision-making tasks. 
Yet commonly used evaluation criteria, such as measuring humans’ ability to predict AI decisions 
in particular instances, provide limited insight into human–AI performance on authentic decision-
making tasks. 
This article presents a case study of an effective human–AI partnership, achieved through 
human-centered and participatory design, in a challenging context: K-12 education. Successful 
human–AI partnerships have rarely been demonstrated in real-world social settings. As an example 
of a domain in which human care for other human beings is central, education represents both a 
challenging domain and fertile ground for human–AI synergy. Throughout this case study, we 
illustrate three recommendations for the design of effective human–AI partnerships, which we 
expect will generalize to similar professional contexts such as healthcare, social work, and criminal 
justice. These include (1) taking a participatory approach to research and design, deeply involving 
practitioners in framing the problems to be addressed and in designing how a partnership will 
function; (2) iteratively measuring and shaping human–AI decision-making in real-world contexts; 
and (3) working towards a theory of complementarity: an understanding of what complementary 
strengths humans and AI systems hold in a given context, which can be used to guide the design 
of systems that combine these strengths. 
 
CASE STUDY  
Background 
Our case study focuses on AI-supported K-12 classrooms, a context in which human teachers and 
AI systems already work side by side, although not typically in carefully designed partnerships. 
AI-based tutoring systems have a long history in interdisciplinary research and are increasingly 
being used in K-12 classrooms (5). As students work on complex problem-solving and other 
learning activities, these systems use AI plan recognition algorithms to respond to individuals’ 
problem-solving strategies, solution paths, and errors.  They adapt instruction to individual 
students’ needs, based on real-time models (often machine-learned) that track students’ behavior, 
their knowledge growth, their metacognitive and self-regulated learning abilities, and even their 
affective states. 
Several meta-analyses have shown that AI tutors can help students learn more effectively 
than other forms of instruction, across a wide range of domains (5). However, the role teachers 
play in K-12 classrooms using AI-based tutoring software remains under-studied (13, 21, 27). Prior 
field studies have found that as students work with the software, teachers, circulating through the 
classroom, are freed up to provide one-on-one guidance to students in need of additional 
assistance, e.g., (13–14, 21, 27, 33). While these studies give us reason to suspect that teachers 
play important roles in mediating students’ learning with AI-based tutoring software, our scientific 
understanding of how this mediation plays out in practice is very incomplete. The same can be 
said for our understanding of how AI systems might be designed to work with teachers more 
effectively, to support even greater student learning outcomes (14, 28, 38). 
The current case study describes the design and field evaluation of a more effective form 
of human–AI partnership for K-12 classrooms that use AI tutors. While prior research has explored 

 
3 
 
the design of tools to support teachers during ongoing classroom instruction – such as learning 
analytics dashboards and classroom management software (2, 33) – this work has rarely targeted 
contexts in which teachers work alongside AI-provided instruction. Yet AI-supported classrooms 
raise unique challenges for teachers, and in turn, for the design of teacher support. For instance, 
AI tutoring software often personalizes the content and pacing of educational activities based on 
automated inferences about individual students’ needs (32), which can in turn make it challenging 
for teachers to keep track of individual students’ activities. Furthermore, given that AI tutoring 
software does not typically coordinate with teachers about how to sequence and pace students’ 
trajectories through the curriculum, conflicts can arise between AI decision-making and a teacher’s 
plans and objectives for the class (14, 18, 32). 
In line with the first of our recommendations for the design of effective human–AI 
partnerships (take a participatory approach to research and design), a key goal of the current 
project was to actively involve teachers throughout all phases of the design of a new real-time 
support tool (17). Recent reviews of the literature on teacher support tools have noted that the 
design of these tools often appears to be guided more by the availability of existing technical 
solutions (27, 33) than by an analysis of what would help teachers the most. However, tools 
resulting from this approach often present information that teachers find difficult to productively 
act upon (14, 33). Thus, we wanted to begin the current project with a thorough exploration of 
teachers’ information needs, to guide design. 
 
Design and development of Lumilo 
The initial, exploratory phases of the current project spanned a wide range of human-centered and 
participatory design activities, conducted with K-12 teachers who had previously used AI tutors 
in their classrooms (17–18). These activities included field observations in K-12 classrooms, 
directed storytelling exercises to understand teachers’ past experiences using AI in the classroom, 
generative card sorting exercises to better understand challenges teachers face during AI-supported 
class sessions, and speed dating studies to explore multiple potential futures for the role of AI in 
education. As an example, to find out what information teachers wanted to have about their 
students in real-time during a class session, unconstrained by their notions of what is 
technologically feasible, we asked them what “superpowers” they would want (14, 17). We found 
that in teachers’ current practice, much of the rich information they take in during AI-supported 
class sessions comes from “reading the classroom:” actively looking at their students’ body 
language and facial expressions. As such, they emphasized that an effective tool would need to 
allow them to keep their eyes and ears on the classroom, augmenting rather than distracting from 
signals already used in their day-to-day practice (2, 12, 14). 
Building upon the rich findings from these formative research activities, we next conducted 
an iterative series of design and prototyping studies with teachers. To engage teachers in the co-
design process as these prototypes achieved greater technical fidelity and complexity (e.g., using 
authentic data and machine learned models), it became necessary to innovate on design and 
prototyping methods (11–12, 15, 17–18). For example, we developed a new prototyping method 
called Replay Enactments (REs). REs embed participants in immersive simulations based on actual 
data collected from field contexts, to make the consequences of algorithm design decisions more 
tangible to stakeholders, even if they know very little about AI. During a session, a member of the 
research team makes live changes to algorithmic elements of a systems’ design based on 
stakeholder feedback (e.g., parameters of a machine-learned model), so they experience the 
consequences of their requested changes (11–12, 17–18). REs can reveal critical issues that  

 
4 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Design mock-ups based on findings from low- to mid-fidelity prototyping sessions; from 
(12). (A) Teacher’s default view of the class. Each student has an indicator display floating above 
their head, and class-level analytics displays are positioned at the front of the class. (B) “Deep-
dive” screens shown if a teacher ‘clicks’ on an indicator. Note: student names shown in this figure 
are fabricated. 
 
conventional prototyping methods cannot surface (e.g., helping design teams observe the interplay 
between human and AI systems’ dynamic decisions and errors). In our project, we ran simulations 
with teachers in classrooms or computer labs, without students, but with student work replayed in 
real time on the computer screens, while the teacher, informed by the tool prototype, would act out 
what they would do if this were a real classroom period. By doing so, we gave teachers a space to 
iterate on Lumilo’s design, without risking harm to actual students in the process. 
The prototype that emerged from this iterative design process was a pair of mixed reality 
smart glasses called Lumilo, which augment teachers’ perceptions of student learning, 
metacognition, and behavior during AI-supported class sessions. When teachers glance across the 

 
5 
 
room while wearing Lumilo, they can see mixed reality icons floating above each individual 
student’s head (see Figure 1, A). These icons update throughout a class session based on real-time 
AI models embedded in the tutoring software, alerting teachers to situations in need of their 
attention. For example, if a student appears unlikely to master certain skills without additional help 
beyond the software, a red question mark icon would appear over the student’s head. With such 
situations prioritized for teachers, they can make more informed decisions about whom to help and 
when.  
The use of a wearable, heads-up display – mixed reality smartglasses, implemented using 
the Microsoft HoloLens – allowed teachers to keep their heads up and their attention focused on 
the classroom, rather than buried in a screen (2, 12–13). In addition to providing information at a 
glance, Lumilo can also display more detailed information about individual students upon a 
teacher’s request. For example, if the AI tutor diagnoses that a student is struggling with particular 
skills at a given moment during class, Lumilo would display these diagnoses, together with 
concrete examples of recent errors the student had made on each skill (see Figure 1, B). Displaying 
these concrete, “raw” examples alongside the AI system’s diagnoses proved to be very important 
to teachers, who would often use the examples to second guess the system’s judgments and try to 
infer deeper underlying causes of student difficulties – an example of one form of complementarity 
between the AI and the teacher (2, 17). 
 
Iterative piloting: Measuring and shaping human–AI decision-making 
Prior to running a large-scale evaluation study with Lumilo in K-12 classrooms, we wanted to 
ensure that this form of human–AI partnership was likely to have a positive impact on students’ 
learning. As discussed above, the initial designs of Lumilo were largely designed based on 
teachers’ beliefs about the classroom situations that most required their attention. However, it is 
possible that teachers’ intuitions are limited in this regard (15). Thus, to complement our co-design 
process, we ran an iterative series of pilot studies in both replayed classrooms (using REs) and live 
K-12 classrooms. In line with our second recommendation for the design of effective human–AI 
partnerships (measure and shape human–AI decision-making in context), we measured the impacts 
of particular designs on teachers’ decision-making, iteratively refining Lumilo’s design with the 
goal of guiding teacher decision-making in positive directions. 
We developed and used Causal Alignment Analysis (CAA), a systematic approach to 
support the data-driven, outcome-oriented design of teacher–AI systems (15). The CAA approach 
asks technology designers to begin by specifying the educational goals and outcomes they wish to 
achieve (e.g., improving on particular measures of student learning or engagement), and then to 
work backwards by sketching out one or more hypothesized causal paths by which those outcomes 
might be achieved. For example, for a given outcome, a designer might specify (1) hypotheses 
regarding possible changes in student behavior that could support that outcome, followed by (2) 
possible changes in teacher behavior that might support the corresponding changes in student 
behavior, and finally (3) possible ways a teacher-facing AI tool might foster these changes in 
teacher behavior. These hypothesized causal paths may initially be informed by existing theory 
and empirical data, where available. When technology prototypes are tested in real-world contexts, 
data collected from these studies offer an opportunity not only to iterate on the design of the 
technology itself, but also to question and iterate upon the designer’s hypothesized causal paths. 
By applying CAA over successive iterations, designers can iteratively refine their designs towards 
achieving their outcomes of interest. 

 
6 
 
Applying CAA in the iterative design of Lumilo meant first making our hypotheses, as 
researchers and designers, about Lumilo’s mechanisms of action explicit, and then iteratively 
prototyping Lumilo in K-12 classrooms. During classroom pilots, we tracked teachers’ activities, 
including how they allocated their time between different students throughout each class session. 
Using this data, we analyzed whether the tool was having desirable effects with respect to our 
hypothesized mechanisms of action, while simultaneously evaluating the plausibility of these 
hypotheses; see (15) for details of this analysis. Using CAA, we iteratively refined the design of 
Lumilo over a sequence of four pilot studies, with a total of 14 teachers, 15 classrooms, and 304 
students. In the end, the resulting version of Lumilo appeared to direct teachers’ attention where it 
was most needed in the classroom, as judged by classroom observation and causal modeling of 
how students learn with AI tutors (9, 15). 
In line with our third recommendation for the design of effective human–AI partnerships 
(work towards a theory of complementarity), these pilot studies not only enabled design refinement 
based on quantitative metrics of teacher behavior (15), but also enabled rich qualitative 
observations that grew our understanding of how this human–AI partnership would play out in the 
real world. In turn, these field observations enabled us to better understand why the particular form 
of teacher–AI partnership facilitated by Lumilo might have a positive impact in the classroom (9).  
Major themes that emerged from classroom observation were that the glasses helpfully 
alerted teachers to situations where their attention could be beneficial, and that teachers did indeed 
make in-the-moment decisions based on complementary data sources. For example, one teacher 
commented that, without the glasses, “I wouldn’t have known this student was doing this at this 
time.” In the moment, teachers would combine what they saw with their own eyes and ears with 
what the AI system was telling them about their students. As one teacher said, “I would also use 
their body language to judge the situation, but the initial [alert] would help, so I know to go over 
there.” This use of complementary data often played out in interesting ways. For example, in one 
particularly memorable case, Lumilo alerted the teacher that a particular 7th grader may be off task 
in the software. However, based on what the teacher knew about this student, they perceived that 
this behavior was out of character. Therefore, rather than taking the alert at face value, the teacher 
initiated a conversation with the student, asking how the student was feeling that day. The student 
revealed that their significant other had broken up with them the weekend before. The teacher, in 
turn, gave the student permission to “take the day off” from math, if they wished (9, 17). 
These examples illustrate a form of human–AI complementarity. The AI diagnosed a 
particular student behavior and alerted the teacher. Based on this information, the teacher then 
made a rich inference about the latent, underlying cause of the behavior, and responded with 
support and flexibility that an AI tutor could not provide (2, 17). More broadly, we observed that 
teachers often appeared to be very effective in helping students escape unproductive ruts in the AI 
software, with very brief, minimal guidance. As teachers circulated throughout their classrooms 
while using Lumilo, they spent an average of about 24 seconds per visit with each student, although 
teachers often visited the same student multiple times during a class; see (15, 17). In many of the 
cases we observed, rather than providing coaching on the math content itself, teachers 
complemented the AI tutors’ instruction by motivating them to reflect on their activities (e.g., “So 
what should you do next?” or “Why did you subtract x from the right side?”), or by providing 
words of encouragement (e.g., “I think you got this, you can do [the rest] on your own”). 
In-the-wild evaluation study 
As the design iterations converged, we next conducted a study to better understand Lumilo’s 
impacts on teacher behavior and student learning in AI-supported classrooms. We investigated the 

 
7 
 
hypotheses that a teacher’s use of Lumilo would enhance student learning in AI-supported 
classrooms, compared to helping students (a) without a teacher support tool (“business as usual”) 
and (b) with mixed-reality glasses that provide only weak classroom monitoring support, without 
analytics. The latter condition made it possible to gauge any motivational or novelty effects that 
teacher monitoring might have on student learning, as observed in prior empirical work (13, 35), 
so as to isolate the influence of Lumilo’s analytics. 
Participants were 343 middle school students, across 18 classrooms, 8 teachers, and 4 
schools and school districts; for participant demographics, see (17). All participating teachers had 
previous experience using AI tutors in their classrooms and had at least 5 years of experience 
teaching math at a middle school level. Classrooms were randomly assigned to one of 3 conditions, 
stratifying within-teacher. The No Glasses condition represented “business as usual” for an AI-
supported classroom. Teachers circulated throughout the classroom, peeking over students’ 
shoulders without a teacher support tool. The Glasses condition provided a minimal form of 
classroom monitoring support: the teacher wore a stripped-down version of Lumilo, which did not 
show any analytics. However, teachers were still able to select individual students using their 
glasses to peek, at a distance, at what was currently displayed on that student’s screen. Finally, in 
the Glasses + Analytics condition, the teacher used the full version of Lumilo. This version offered 
the remote screen monitoring functionality, at-a-glance visual indicators for each student based on 
real-time analytics, and detail screens indicating where students are struggling, as described above.  
 
 
Fig. 2. Student pre/post learning gains, by experimental conditions ("Glasses + Analytics": 
Teacher uses Lumilo; from (16). "Glasses": Teacher wears reduced version of Lumilo, without 
analytics; "noGlasses": Teacher does not wear glasses at all). Error bars indicate standard error. 
 

 
8 
 
The study procedure was the same for all three conditions. Students took a 15-minute pre-test on 
linear equation solving. Students then worked with Lynnette, an AI tutor for linear equation 
solving, for two class sessions, while their teacher monitored the class and helped students. Finally, 
students took a 15-minute post-test. In addition to students’ pre- and post-test scores, we tracked 
process data from individual students’ interactions with Lynnette. We also used Lumilo to record 
a teacher’s physical position in the classroom, relative to each student, moment-by-moment via 
the HoloLens’ built-in sensors; see (15–17). Fifty-seven students were absent for one or more days 
of the study and were excluded from further analyses. Data were analyzed for the remaining 286 
students, using hierarchical linear modeling; see (16) for details.    
Analysis of the pre- and post-tests supported both of our hypotheses. First, a teacher’s use 
of Lumilo enhances student learning, compared with business-as-usual for AI-supported 
classrooms, a high-bar control condition considering prior positive results regarding the 
effectiveness of AI tutoring software (5). Second, a teacher’s use of real-time analytics had a 
positive effect on student learning, above and beyond any effects of the minimal classroom 
monitoring support provided in the Glasses condition. Thus, part of Lumilo’s benefit was due to 
its real-time analytics, and part of it was due to the mere use of the glasses, even without any 
advanced analytics (see Figure 2). This was the first experimental study in the literature to 
demonstrate that a teacher–AI partnership, facilitated by real-time analytics from AI tutors, can 
enhance student learning outcomes.  
 
 
Fig. 3. Teacher attention allocation (in seconds) plotted by pretest scores, across 286 students. 
Lines indicate model mean values for each experimental condition; shaded regions indicate 
standard error; overlapping shaded regions indicate overlapping standard errors. 
 

 
9 
 
To better understand the mechanisms by which this effect may have arisen, we examined how 
teachers’ allocation of time, across students of varying incoming knowledge, was influenced by 
experimental condition. We found that, compared with the Glasses and No Glasses conditions, 
teachers in the Glasses + Analytics condition tended to spend much more of their time working 
with students coming in with lower initial knowledge (as measured by the pre-test); see Figure 3. 
In turn, students with lower pre-test scores enjoyed greater growth in the Lumilo condition than in 
the other conditions, whereas those with high pre-test scores were not affected. In both the Glasses 
and No Glasses conditions, we observed the “rich get richer” trends that are sometimes observed 
in AI-supported classrooms and in education more generally: students coming in with higher initial 
knowledge tend to benefit more from working with the tutor (30). However, in the Glasses + 
Analytics condition, teachers’ use of Lumilo attenuated these trends, reducing knowledge 
differences between students at post-test (see Figure 4). The notion that redirecting teachers’ 
attention during personalized class sessions might benefit students’ learning has found 
correlational support in prior studies (e.g., 13, 15, 26, 35), yet had not received experimental 
support until the current study. Considering that the overall time a teacher can spend per student 
during these class sessions is still quite small, these results suggest that a little can go a long way, 
in terms of individualized teacher attention, especially when timely and targeted with the help of 
AI. For a more detailed report on these analyses, see (16).  
 
 
Fig. 4. Student posttest scores plotted by pretest scores, across 286 students. Lines indicate model 
mean values for each experimental condition; shaded regions indicate standard error; overlapping 
shaded regions indicate overlapping standard errors.  
 
 

 
10 
 
DISCUSSION 
Our case study illustrates the design and evaluation of a successful human–AI partnership in a 
challenging real-world context: K-12 education. While AI has shown great potential to enhance 
learning and teaching in K-12, the work of human teachers has been recognized as unlikely to be 
fully automated (7, 24). We concur: as in other care-based professions where relationship building 
is central, AI systems appear to have the greatest potential for positive impact where they are 
designed to augment and complement the abilities of human practitioners. In the Lumilo project, 
we took a participatory approach to research and design, deeply engaging teachers both in framing 
the challenges to be addressed through an improved partnership and in shaping how this 
partnership would function. Through iterative piloting in live K-12 classrooms, we observed the 
interplay of human and AI decision-making under real-world conditions, refining the design of 
Lumilo based on our observations to shape human–AI decision-making in more positive 
directions. Throughout this process, we worked to develop our understanding of what 
complementary strengths human teachers and AI tutors hold in our context, and how Lumilo’s 
design might be optimized to effectively combine these strengths. 
We view these components – taking a participatory approach to research and design, 
measuring and shaping human–AI decision-making in context, and working towards a theory of 
complementarity – as essential ingredients in the design of effective human–AI partnerships, both 
within and beyond the domain of education. Accordingly, to advance scientific and design progress 
in this area, we highlight three broad recommendations for future research. First, to support the 
development of human–AI partnerships that are aligned with real-world needs and work practices, 
it is critical to engage practitioners throughout the entire design and development lifecycle for a 
new technology. However, deeply involving practitioners becomes challenging when designing 
data-driven AI systems, given that practitioners may know very little about AI. The current case 
study illustrates the value of developing new design and prototyping methods. However, further 
research is urgently needed to develop new technical and design methods that can meaningfully 
engage non-technical stakeholders in understanding and working with AI as a design material, e.g., 
see (12, 40). Second, to support more reliable scientific and design insight into the behavior and 
dynamics of human–AI partnerships, future research should strive to study these systems in real-
world contexts, with authentic tasks and relevant human experts. Although the use of artificial 
tasks and contexts may appear convenient, recent work has demonstrated that results from such 
studies often fail to translate to the real-world settings for which partnerships are intended, e.g., 
see (4–5, 25). Third, to support cumulative scientific progress and more systematic design 
exploration in this area, future research should work to develop and build upon both domain-
general and domain-specific theories of human–AI complementarity. While we have begun to 
pursue this direction within the current case study, theory formation remains a critical open 
direction for the field, e.g., see (5, 10, 17, 37).  
 
References 
1. A. Alkhatib, M. Bernstein, Street-level algorithms: A theory at the gaps between policy 
and decisions. Proc. ACM CHI Conference. 1-13 (2019). 
2. P. An, K. Holstein, B. d’Anjou, B. Eggen, S. Bakker, The TA framework: Designing real-
time teaching augmentation for K-12 classrooms. Proc. ACM CHI Conference. 1-17 
(2020). 

 
11 
 
3. Z. Buçinca, P. Lin, K. Z. Gajos, E. L. Glassman, Proxy tasks and subjective measures can 
be misleading in evaluating explainable AI systems." Proc. ACM IUI Conference. 454-
464. (2020). 
4. M. De-Arteaga, R. Fogliato, A. Chouldechova, A case for humans-in-the-loop: Decisions 
in the presence of erroneous algorithmic scores. Proc. ACM CHI Conference. 1-12 (2020). 
5. B. du Boulay, Artificial intelligence as an effective classroom assistant. IEEE Intelligent 
Systems, 31(6), 76-81 (2016). 
6. D. C. Engelbart, “Augmenting human intellect: A conceptual framework” (Menlo Park, 
CA, 1962). 
7. C. B. Frey, M. A. Osborne. “The future of employment: How susceptible are jobs to 
computerisation” (Univ. of Oxford, 2013) .  
8. B. Green & Y. Chen. "Disparate interactions: An algorithm-in-the-loop analysis of fairness 
in risk assessments." Proc. ACM FAccT Conference. 90-99 (2019). 
9. K. Holstein, “Designing real-time teacher augmentation to combine strengths of human 
and AI instruction,” thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA (2019). 
10. K. Holstein, V. Aleven, N. Rummel, A conceptual framework for human–AI hybrid 
adaptivity in education. Proc. AIED Conference (2020). 
11. K. Holstein, E. Harpstead, R. Gulotta, J. Forlizzi, Replay Enactments: Exploring possible 
futures through historical data. Proc. ACM DIS Conference (2020). 
12. K. Holstein, G. Hong, M. Tegene, B. M. McLaren, V. Aleven, The classroom as a 
dashboard: co-designing wearable cognitive augmentation for K-12 teachers. Proc. LAK 
Conference. 79-88 (2018). 
13. K. Holstein, B. M. McLaren, & V. Aleven, SPACLE: Investigating learning across virtual 
and physical spaces using spatial replays. Proc. LAK Conference. 358-367 (2017). 
14. K. Holstein, B. M. McLaren, V. Aleven. Intelligent tutors as teachers' aides: Exploring 
teacher needs for real-time analytics in blended classrooms. Proc. LAK Conference. 257-
266 (2017). 
15. K. Holstein, B. M. McLaren, V. Aleven, Informing the design of teacher awareness tools 
through causal alignment analysis. In Proc. ICLS Conference. 104-111 (2018). 
16. K. Holstein, B. M. McLaren, V. Aleven, Student learning benefits of a mixed-reality 
teacher awareness tool in AI-enhanced classrooms. Proc. AIED Conference. 154-168 
(2018). 
17. K. Holstein, B. M. McLaren, V. Aleven, Co-designing a real-time classroom orchestration 
tool to support teacher–AI complementarity. Journal of Learning Analytics. 27-52 (2019). 
18. K. Holstein, B. M. McLaren, V. Aleven, Designing for complementarity: Teacher and 
student needs for orchestration support in AI-enhanced classrooms. Proc. AIED 
Conference. 157-171 (2019). 
19. E. Horvitz, T. Paek, Complementary computing: policies for transferring callers from 
dialog systems to human receptionists. Proc. UMUAI. 159-182 (2007). 
20. E. Kamar, Directions in hybrid intelligence: Complementing AI systems with human 
intelligence. Proc. IJCAI. 4070-4073 (2016). 
21. A. Kessler, M. Boston, M. K. Stein, Exploring how teachers support students’ 
mathematical learning in computer-directed learning environments. Information and 
Learning Sciences. 121(1/2), 52-78 (2019). 
22. J. C. Licklider, Man-computer symbiosis. IRE Trans. on Human Factors in Electronics. 4-
11 (1960). 

 
12 
 
23. B. Lubars & C. Tan, Ask not what AI can do, but what AI should do: Towards a framework 
of task delegability. Proc. NeurIPS. 57-67 (2019). 
24. E. Lurie & D. K. Mulligan, Crowdworkers are not judges: Rethinking crowdsourced 
vignette 
studies 
as 
a 
risk 
assessment 
evaluation 
technique. 
http://fair-
ai.owlstown.com/publications/1434 (2020). 
25. R. Martinez-Maldonado, J. Kay, K. Yacef, M. T. Edbauer, Y. Dimitriadis, MTClassroom 
and MTDashboard: Supporting analysis of teacher attention in an orchestrated multi-
tabletop classroom. In Proc. CSCL Conference. 320-327 (2013). 
26. R. Martinez-Maldonado, A. Pardo, N. Mirriahi, K. Yacef, J. Kay, & A. Clayphan, The 
LATUX workflow: Designing and deploying awareness tools in technology-enabled 
learning settings. In Proc. LAK Conference. 1-10 (2015). 
27. W. L. Miller, R. S. Baker, M. J. Labrum, K. Petsche, Y. H. Liu, A. Z. Wagner, Automated 
detection of proactive remediation by teachers in Reasoning Mind classrooms. In Proc. 
LAK Conference. 290-294 (2015). 
28. B. N. Patel, L. Rosenberg, G. Willcox, D. Baltaxe, M. Lyons, J. Irvin, P. Rajpurkar et al. 
Human–machine partnership with artificial intelligence for chest radiograph diagnosis. 
NPJ Digital Medicine. 1-10 (2019). 
29. F. Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al. Manipulating and measuring model interpretability. In Proc. 
ACM CHI Conference. 1-52 (2021). 
30. J. Reich, M. Ito, “From good intentions to real outcomes: Equity by design in learning 
technologies,” (Digital Media and Learning Research Hub, 2017). 
31. S. Ritter, M. Yudelson, S. E. Fancsali, S. R. Berman, How mastery learning works at scale. 
In Proc. ACM Learning@ Scale Conference. 71-79 (2016). 
32. M. J. Rodriguez Triana, L. P. Prieto Santos, A. Vozniuk, M. Shirvani Boroujeni, B. A. 
Schwendimann, A. C. Holzer, D. Gillet, Monitoring, awareness and reflection in blended 
technology enhanced learning: A systematic review. International Journal of Technology 
Enhanced Learning. 126-150 (2017). 
33. J. W. Schofield, R. Eurich-Fulcer, C. L. Britt, Teachers, computer tutors, and teaching: The 
artificially intelligent tutor as an agent for classroom change. American Educational 
Research Journal. 31(3), 579-607 (1994). 
34. J. B. Stang, I. Roll, Interactions between teaching assistants and students boost engagement 
in physics labs. Phys. Review Special Topics – Physics Education Research. 10(2), 020117 
(2014). 
35. S. Tan et al., https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.09123 (2018). 
36. B. Wilder et al., https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.00582 (2020). 
37. K. Yacef, Intelligent teaching assistant systems. In Proc. Conference on Computers in 
Education. 136-140 (2002). 
38. Q. Yang, A. Steinfeld, C. Rosé, J. Zimmerman, Re-examining whether, why, and how 
human-AI interaction is uniquely difficult to design. In Proc. ACM CHI Conference. 1-13 
(2020). 
39. Q. Yang, A. Steinfeld, J. Zimmerman, Unremarkable AI: Fitting intelligent decision 
support into critical, clinical decision-making processes. In Proc. ACM CHI Conference. 
1-11 (2019). 
 
 
 

 
13 
 
Authors 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Kenneth Holstein (kjholste@cs.cmu.edu) is an Assistant Professor in Human-Computer 
Interaction (HCI) at Carnegie Mellon University, where he leads the Co-Augmentation, Learning, 
and AI (CoALA) Lab (https://www.thecoalalab.com/). His group studies how humans and AI 
systems can augment each other’s abilities (co-augmentation) and learn from each other (co-
learning) to support more effective and responsible human-AI collaborations. Throughout their 
work, they partner with stakeholders in real-world contexts, and create new methods to facilitate 
stakeholder involvement across the AI development lifecycle. Finally, they conduct field 
experiments to understand the impacts of these human–AI systems in deployment. 
 
 
Dr. Vincent Aleven (aleven@cs.cmu.edu) is a Professor of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) 
at Carnegie Mellon University. He has 25 years of experience in research and development of AI-
based tutoring software grounded in cognitive theory and self-regulated learning theory. His 
current focus is on developing dynamic learning environments that combine strengths of human 
and AI instruction. His lab created the Mathtutor website (https://web.mathtutor.cmu.edu) as well 
as CTAT+Tutorshop, a key infrastructure for development of AI-based learning software, which 
has been used to create many dozens of tutoring systems that have been used in real educational 
settings. Aleven serves as co-editor-in-chief of the International Journal of Artificial Intelligence 
in Education (IJAIED). 
