Effective and Scalable Math Support: Experimental          
Evidence on the Impact of an AI- Math Tutor in Ghana 
Owen Henkel1, Hannah Horne-Robinson2, Nessie Kozhakhmetova, Amanda Lee3 
1 University of Oxford 
2 Rising Academies 
3 J-PAL North America 
Abstract. This study is a preliminary evaluation of the impact of receiving 
extra math instruction provided by Rori, an AI-powered math tutor accessible via 
WhatsApp, on the math performance of approximately 500 students in Ghana. 
Students assigned to both the control and treatment groups continued their normal 
classes with identical curricula and classroom hours. Students in the treatment 
group were given access to a phone for one hour a week – during their study hall 
period – and were allowed to use Rori to independently study math.  All other 
aspects of the groups’ in-school experience were the same. We find that the math 
growth scores were substantially higher for the treatment group and statistically 
significant (p < 0.001). The effect size of 0.36 is considered large in the context 
of educational interventions: approximately equivalent to an extra year of learn-
ing. Importantly, Rori works on basic mobile devices connected to low-band-
width data networks, and the marginal cost of providing Rori is approximately 
$5 per student, making it a potentially scalable intervention in the context of 
LMICs’ education systems. While the results should be interpreted judiciously, 
as they only report on year 1 of the intervention, they do suggest that chat-based 
tutoring solutions leveraging AI could offer a cost-effective and operationally ef-
ficient approach to enhancing learning outcomes for millions of students globally. 
Keywords: LLMs, conversational agents, mobile-learning 
1 
Introduction 
Fewer than 15% of students in Africa achieve minimum proficiency in math by the end 
of middle school  [1]. Most students in the region are taught content that surpasses their 
ability level, have limited opportunities to practice new skills, and often do not receive 
the necessary feedback due to large class sizes and under-resourced teachers [1]. Re-
search has long suggested that high-quality one-on-one instruction can significantly 
improve educational outcomes [2], [3], [4]. However, in many Low and Middle-Income 
Countries (LMICs), including West Africa, the low supply and high cost of quality 
tutors mean that many learners cannot access this type of support [5]. Thus, research is 
needed to identify affordable and feasible interventions appropriate for this space.  
In recent years, interest has been increasing in technology-enabled approaches such 
as adaptive learning environments and virtual tutors to offer additional support to learn-
ers where personal tutors are not available. These approaches have been used to varying 
degrees of success in supplementing traditional instruction, but, when they work, they 

2  Experimental Evidence on the Impact of an AI- Math Tutor in Ghana 
 
are extremely cost-effective, a consideration that is particularly important in LMIC con-
texts. However, a major hurdle to extending the use of these types of tools to LMICs, 
has been the lack of widespread access to personal computers and reliable, high-speed 
internet that these learning environments typically require. In West Africa, for instance, 
less than 20% of the population has access to home computers and robust internet con-
nections [6]. However, mobile phone usage is remarkably high in the region, with data 
indicating that around 90% of West Africans own a mobile phone and reside in areas 
with 3G coverage [6], [7]. This trend suggests the possibility of implementing interac-
tive educational experiences on mobile platforms, circumventing the need for expen-
sive personal computers and high-speed internet.  
Rising Academies, an educational network based in Ghana, has created Rori, a free 
AI-powered math tutor available on WhatsApp. Inspired by successful elements of 
Teaching at the Right Level and Intelligent Tutoring System, Rori has students work 
their way through a curriculum of over 500 micro-lessons, based on the Global Profi-
ciency Framework, an internationally recognized set of math learning standards. Each 
micro-lesson includes a brief explanation and a series of scaffolded practice questions 
tied to a specific learning standard. If a student struggles with a question, they receive 
a hint first and then a worked solution.  
 
Fig. 1. Interaction with Rori while  solving math problems. 
  
A key component of Rori is the use of various natural language processing (NLP) 
methods, including specialized language models (LLMs). This enables students to chat 
with Rori using natural language, rather than simple navigating a pre-defined button-
based dialog. The natural language interface of Rori positions it to both better interpret 
students’ answer attempts and questions, and to engage students in more open-ended 

 
 
3 
conversations about math goals and metacognitive skills. For more context you can 
watch this 2-minute video.   
To evaluate if receiving extra math instruction provided by Rori impacts math learn-
ing, students in grades 3-9 from Rising Academies’ schools in Ghana participated in 
this study. The schools were divided into treatment and control groups. The treatment 
group, as a supplement to regular math instruction, engaged in two 30-minute weekly 
sessions with Rori during their study hall period. The control group continued regular 
math instruction and did not receive access to Rori during study hall. Students in both 
groups were given a math assessment twice over 8 months which made it possible to 
assess the impact of Rori on math performance while controlling for confounding var-
iables through the comparison of similar schools (i.e., a difference-in-difference meas-
ure between the two groups).  
2 
Prior Work 
2.1 
ITSs and Adaptive Learning Environments 
While high-dosage tutoring is a highly effective tool for enhancing student learning [2], 
[4], its scalability is hindered by operational and financial constraints. Advancements 
in technology have led to attempts to replicate this effect by delivering personalized 
education through Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITSs) which aim to adapt the learning 
experience to individual student needs, customizing the content and pace, thus emulat-
ing one-on-one tutoring [8]. These systems have been implemented in various educa-
tional contexts, such as K-12 classrooms and universities, and there is evidence that 
they can be effective, particularly for the teaching of mathematics and science [9]. In 
addition to ITSs, other related approaches have emerged in the field of educational 
technology. Adaptive learning systems, for example, use algorithms to tailor content 
and pace to students' needs and typically allow students to move through the curriculum 
in a flexible and personalized manner [10]. While opinions vary on their effectiveness, 
these approaches hold potential in addressing several educational challenges, particu-
larly in the context of resource-constrained education systems where increasing instruc-
tional time, or providing high-dosage tutoring would not be possible [11]. 
 
2.2 
Teaching at the Right Level 
Despite a successful push to increase school enrolment in LMICs, this has not always 
translated into improvements in learning for all students[1]. Practically, many national 
curricula primarily cater to high-achieving students, neglecting most children who lag 
behind. Various factors at both school and home contribute to this predicament [12]. 
One effective approach to this challenge has been Teaching at the Right Level (TaRL) 
[13].  First, children's learning levels are evaluated, then they are grouped based on 
those levels rather than age or grade, and taught at their current ability level, using a 
curriculum that prioritizes foundational skills [12]. Randomized evaluations conducted 
in India over 2001-2020, Western Kenya in 2005, and Botswana in 2020 consistently 
show that programs employing these strategies improve learning outcomes. For exam-
ple, research by Nobel laureates Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo demonstrated a 0.28 

4  Experimental Evidence on the Impact of an AI- Math Tutor in Ghana 
 
SD improvement in learning outcomes, equivalent to an additional 1.5 years of school-
ing [13]. While extremely effective, inventions such as TaRL typically require a non-
trivial amount of teacher training as well as operational changes in a school setting, 
which are challenges to wide-spread adoption. As result, there has been interest in see-
ing if technology-supported inventions can partially emulate the successful compo-
nents.   
 
2.3 
Technology Supported Learning in LMICs 
The personalization inherent in Intelligent Tutoring Systems has substantial similarities 
with the TaRL approach, and some interventions have tried to leverage technology to 
implement individualized teaching strategies [13], [14]. A study of a computer-assisted 
intervention using similar principles resulted in a 0.47 SD improvement, approximately 
2.5 years of schooling, and a recent randomized control trial on a computer-assisted 
program estimated a 0.6 SD improvement in math scores over a year, or approximately 
an additional three years of schooling [14]. However, students in resource-constrained 
settings often don’t have access to home computers and the internet, prompting explo-
ration for more cost-effective and accessible educational solutions.  
There have been attempts to explore whether phone-based interventions can offer a 
viable alternative for delivering educational content and support, particularly for cases 
of disruption in traditional educational settings [15]. For instance, in Kenya, M-Shule 
offers SMS-based micro-courses and personalized tuition tools to support primary 
school students in English, Kiswahili, and Math. [16]. However, other studies found 
that another mobile-based educational intervention did not  produce learning gains [17]. 
Considering the diverse findings, our research seeks to contribute to the growing body 
of literature on mobile learning in LMICs by examining the impact of Rori on math 
learning gains. We aim to shed light on the potential of such interventions to provide a 
cost-effective and accessible means of delivering educational content and support to 
students in these low-resource settings. 
3 
Current Study 
3.1 
Overview 
Students from 11 of Rising Academies’ schools in Ghana were involved in the study. 
These schools were selected based on their similarities in geography, demographics, 
curricula, and teaching methodologies. Schools were randomly assigned to two groups: 
a control group, which included students from six schools; and a treatment group, which 
included students from five schools. The assignment was done as the school level, as 
assignment at the student level was not feasible for a variety of reasons.  
The treatment group participated in two 30-minute sessions with Rori every week, 
during their study hall period. While teachers were present during these sessions to help 
resolve potential technical issues, and students spent the period working independently 
on Rori;  watch a clip of a Rori session. Meanwhile, the students in the control group 
did not have access to Rori during their study hall period and continued to receive their 
regular math instruction. Both groups completed math assessment in early February 

 
 
5 
(baseline) and late August (endline) of 2023. The same math assessment was used at 
both timepoints and all grade levels. The assessment consisted of 35 questions, each 
worth one point, with a mixture of multiple-choice and open-response questions cover-
ing numeracy and algebra skills from grades 3 to 5 on the Global Proficiency Frame-
work.  
Rori is an intervention that is characterized by its low cost and minimal disruption 
to school operations. Other potentially efficacious interventions such as extended in-
structional time, smaller classroom sizes, or high-dosage tutoring would simply not be 
feasible due to the associated costs. Resultingly, we compare the incremental impact of 
Rori relative to normal schooling, which allows us to understand the specific impact of 
potentially scalable intervention in enhancing educational outcomes.  
 
3.2 
Participation 
Initially, 637 students in grades 3-8 participated in the baseline assessment and out of 
that group, 477 students also completed the endline. The attrition of 160 students was 
primarily due to inconsistent school attendance; it is common for students to miss 
school periodically due to personal reasons. Of the 477 students who participated in 
both tests, 241 were in the control group and 236 were in the treatment group. Statistical 
examinations were conducted to assess any systematic differences between the control 
and treatment group at baseline and to determine if there were distinctions between 
students who completed the study and those who did not. We found no systematic dif-
ference in control and treatment group, and only small differences in the students who 
took the baseline but not the endline, which is discussed in detail in the subsequent 
section.  
4 
Results 
4.1 
Estimated Learning Gains 
To assess the impact of using Rori on learning, growth scores were computed by sub-
tracting baseline raw scores, the number of questions answered correctly, from endline 
raw scores for each student who completed both tests. An independent samples t-test 
between the control (M = 2.12, SD = 6.30) and the treatment group (M = 5.13, SD = 
7.03) revealed that the 3.01 difference in growth scores was highly statistically signifi-
cant (p < 0.001). 
 
Table 1. 
Descriptive statistics for each condition. 
 
Condition 
Control (N=241) 
Treatment (N=237) 
Test 
Baseline 
Endline 
Baseline 
Endline 
Mean 
20.20 
22.32 
20.29 
25.42 
St Dev 
8.81 
8.06 
8.72 
7.25 
Growth 
2.12 
5.13 
 

6  Experimental Evidence on the Impact of an AI- Math Tutor in Ghana 
 
To understand the magnitude of the difference in learning gains between the treatment 
and control groups, we calculated the effect size using the pooled standard deviation 
from both conditions and time points, as suggested by Morris [18]. The calculated effect 
size between the baseline and endline, expressed as Cohen's d, was found to be 0.36. 
This effect size would be considered a moderate to large effect size in educational re-
search. Hattie et al. would categorize 0.29 as moderate, and similar to the magnitude of 
the effect of a good teacher [19]. Whereas Kraft proposes argued that educational in-
terventions with an 0.20 SD of over should be considered as large [20]. 
Another way to get a sense of the magnitude of the learning gains is to compare the 
learning gains of the control group (2.12) – which is indicative of the amount of im-
provement due to normal classes and potential retest effects – to that of the treatment 
group (5.13), which suggests the differential impact of Rori might be equal or greater 
than a year of schooling.  
 
4.2 
Comparing Characteristics of Treatment and Control Group 
To establish baseline equivalence and ensure comparability of the two groups, baseline 
scores, gender and age were compared. No statistically significant difference was found 
in the baseline scores of the two groups (t(475) = -0.17, p = 0.87), suggesting that the 
two groups had equivalent levels of math knowledge at the start of the evaluation. 
Gender distribution was compared across the two groups. The chi-square test for the 
association between gender and condition yielded a non-significant result (χ² = 0.93, p 
= 0.33), suggesting no statistically significant difference in gender distribution between 
the control and treatment groups. Age variation was also examined, and an independent 
samples t-test was conducted, and the results indicated no statistically significant dif-
ference in mean age between the control and treatment groups (t (475) = 1.23, p = 
0.22).  
Overall, these analyses indicate that the control and treatment groups had statisti-
cally similar baseline scores and were balanced across age and gender. The similarity 
of the control and treatment group combined with the fact that the results report a dif-
ference in difference score (i.e., a “growth” score), suggest that the improvement in 
learning observed is attributable to the intervention (i.e., using Rori) rather than other 
measured factors (e.g., prior aptitude, gender, age). 
 
4.3 
Comparing Students Who Completed Both Tests vs Those Who Did Not 
The baseline was taken by 637 students in grades 3-8 (336 in Treatment, 301 in Con-
trol), of which 477 took the endline and 160 did not. The mean age for the students who 
took both tests was 12.10 (SD = 1.95) and those who dropped out was 11.93 (SD = 
2.15) and there was no statistically significant difference between the two groups 
(t(635) = 0.88, p = 0.38). The gender distribution was compared between the students 
who completed both assessments and those who dropped out. The chi-square test for 
the association between gender and test completion yielded a non-significant result (χ² 
= 0.766, p = 0.38). 
The mean raw baseline score of those that completed both tests was 22.26 (SD = 
7.57) and the mean score of those that dropped out was 18.53 (SD = 7.70). While there 
was a difference in baseline ability between these two groups of students, the reported 

 
 
7 
effect size of the intervention is calculated based on growth scores of students who 
completed both tests, so it would not be impacted by this difference. None-the-less, this 
difference needs to be investigated as there are many possible explanations that are not 
within the scope of this paper.  
5 
Discussion  
5.1 
Implications 
The initial evidence reveals that receiving extra math practice with Rori led to substan-
tial learning gains across multiple grade levels. The intervention's effectiveness in im-
proving math skills is not confined to a narrow age band but is instead spread across a 
broad spectrum, indicating that it can adapt to different learning stages without the need 
for considerable financial investment. While the results should be interpreted with cau-
tion, they do suggest that chat-based tutoring solutions leveraging AI could offer a cost-
effective and operationally efficient approach to enhancing learning outcomes for stu-
dents globally. 
In a policy context, the effect size of an intervention like Rori is favorable in relation 
to its cost to implement. The cost structure (i.e. LLM API, mobile device, 3G data costs) 
presents a scalable model, with initial setup expenses offset by the possibility of achiev-
ing an annual cost as low as $5 per student. Therefore, it could be a financially viable 
solution for resource-constrained educational settings. In addition to cost, interventions 
can struggle to scale because of the difficulties of replicating technical and support in-
frastructure in new geographies. Relative to changing curricula or teaching practices, 
Rori is relatively straightforward to implement once schools have access to mobile 
phones, as it does not require additional teaching staff or extensive training. Relying on 
widely used and accessible devices, such as budget phones and chat platforms like 
WhatsApp, minimizes dependence on existing infrastructure, avoiding the limitations 
posed by the lack of personal computers and reliable high-speed internet. 
 
5.2 
Limitations 
While the experimental design of this study was robust and the learning gains were both 
large and statistically significant, there are certain limitations. With educational inter-
ventions there is always a potential for unobserved differences between the treatment 
and control group. While schools were randomly assigned to treatment and control 
groups and both had the same curriculum, lesson plans, and timetable, it is possible that 
the school administrators and teachers at the treatment schools changed their behavior 
because of increased observation (i.e. Hawthorne effect). However, schools in the Ris-
ing Academies Network are accustomed to routine testing and observation, so this is 
less likely to be a potential confound. Relatedly, while multiple analyses were con-
ducted to investigate baseline equivalence of the two groups, there may have been un-
observed differences in students’ prior ability, or subtle differences in their socio-eco-
nomic background that could have influenced the results. 
Another potential limitation was the design of the assessment. To make tracking stu-
dent progress comparable across grades, the same assessment was used for all students. 
This led to some students, particularly those in higher grade levels, receiving perfect 

8  Experimental Evidence on the Impact of an AI- Math Tutor in Ghana 
 
scores at baseline, so it was not possible to observe their improvement over time. While 
this would suggest that growth scores might have been understated, it is also possible 
that Rori is only effective in helping students with relatively easier math topics, and 
that the learning gains might be diminished if older students were tested on more diffi-
cult topics. 
 
5.3 
Further Research 
There are several opportunities for future research, as mentioned an examination of the 
observed attrition in this study is warranted. Another area of investigation that was out-
side the scope of this study was the specific relationship between time spent using Rori 
and improved math ability. It is plausible that student learning was an approximately 
linear function of the amount of time students spent using Rori, but it is equally plausi-
ble that the relationship is nonlinear and that the beneficial effect of Rori plateaus after 
a certain amount of usage. Subsequent research investigating dosage over time might 
also reveal interactions with learning gains, such as identifying an optimal amount of 
interaction time before reaching diminishing returns in performance or potential inter-
ference with learning in other subjects. Future studies could also employ more diverse 
and comprehensive assessment tools, reducing the ceiling effects observed in this study 
and enhancing the validity and reliability of student evaluation. Finally, future studies 
could investigate the impact of Rori in other schools outside of Rising Academies Net-
work or in other countries. Rori could also be used by children at home. This would 
contribute to the generalizability of this study’s findings that using Rori improves math 
learning.  
6 
Conclusion 
The present study explored the impact of the artificial intelligence conversational math 
tutor accessible through WhatsApp on the math performance students in Ghana. We 
found that the treatment group's math growth scores were markedly higher, with an 
effect size of 0.36, and data exhibiting statistical significance (p < 0.001). Given its 
ability to operate on basic mobile devices on low-bandwidth data networks, the inter-
vention exhibits substantial potential in supporting personalized learning in other 
LMICs. In such regions, the possession of laptops and access to high-speed internet 
connectivity, requisites for many video-centered learning platforms, remain signifi-
cantly limited. 
However, it is prudent to interpret these results with caution. As this study provides 
insight from just the first year of intervention in a school-based context, it underlines 
the necessity for additional, future research to ascertain the conditions essential for en-
suring its successful implementation, but also identifies the importance of a personal-
ized, adaptive approach to enrich students' learning experience. Nevertheless, the re-
sults presented here highlight the potential of chat-based tutoring solutions leveraging 
artificial intelligence to offer a cost-effective strategy to boost learning outcomes for 
disadvantaged students globally. 

 
 
9 
References 
[1] 
World Bank, UNESCO, UNICEF, USAID, FCDO, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, 
“The State of Global Learning Poverty: 2022 Update,” 2022. 
[2] 
B. S. Bloom, “The 2 Sigma Problem: The Search for Methods of Group Instruction as 
Effective as One-to-One Tutoring,” Educ. Res., vol. 13, no. 6, p. 4, Jun. 1984, doi: 
10.2307/1175554. 
[3] 
P. F. Vadasy, J. R. Jenkins, L. R. Antil, S. K. Wayne, and R. E. O’Connor, “The Effec-
tiveness of One-to-One Tutoring by Community Tutors for at-Risk Beginning Readers,” 
Learn. Disabil. Q., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 126–139, May 1997, doi: 10.2307/1511219. 
[4] 
M. T. H. Chi, S. A. Siler, H. Jeong, T. Yamauchi, and R. G. Hausmann, “Learning from 
human tutoring,” Cogn. Sci., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 471–533, Jul. 2001.   
[5] 
Bray, M., “Shadow education in Sub-Saharan Africa: scale, nature and policy implica-
tions.” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000380073 
[6] 
“Overview of state of digital development around the world based on ITU data.” Interna-
tional 
Telecommunication 
Union 
(ITU), 
2022. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Dashboards/Pages/Digital-Development.aspx 
[7] 
L. Silver and C. Johnson, “Internet Connectivity Seen as Having Positive Impact on Life 
in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Pew Research Center. 
[8] 
K. Vanlehn, “The Relative Effectiveness of Human Tutoring, Intelligent Tutoring Sys-
tems, and Other Tutoring Systems,” Educ. Psychol., vol. 46, no. 4, Art. no. 4, Oct. 2011. 
[9] 
S. Steenbergen-Hu and H. Cooper, “A meta-analysis of the effectiveness of intelligent 
tutoring systems on college students’ academic learning.,” J. Educ. Psychol., vol. 106, no. 
2, pp. 331–347, May 2014, doi: 10.1037/a0034752. 
[10] 
P. Phobun and J. Vicheanpanya, “Adaptive intelligent tutoring systems for e-learning sys-
tems,” Procedia - Soc. Behav. Sci., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 4064–4069, 2010.  d 
[11] 
B. D. Nye, “Intelligent Tutoring Systems by and for the Developing World: A Review of 
Trends and Approaches for Educational Technology in a Global Context,” Int. J. Artif. 
Intell. Educ., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 177–203, Jun. 2015, doi: 10.1007/s40593-014-0028-6. 
[12] 
Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL), “‘Teaching at the Right Level to improve 
learning.’ J-PAL Evidence to Policy Case Study.” 2018. 
[13] 
Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Banerji, Rukmini and Berry, James and Duflo, Esther and Kan-
nan, Harini and Mukerji, Shobhini and Shotland, Marc and Walton, Michael, “Main-
streaming an Effective Intervention: Evidence from Randomized Evaluations of ‘Teach-
ing at the Right Level’ in India,” MIT Dep. Econ. Work. Pap. No 16-08, Nov. 2016.  
[14] 
K. Muralidharan, A. Singh, and A. Ganimian, “Disrupting Education? Experimental Evi-
dence on Technology-Aided Instruction in India,” Am. Econ. Rev., vol. 109, no. 4, pp. 
1426–60, 2019. 
[15] 
R. F. Kizilcec, M. Chen, K. K. Jasińska, M. Madaio, and A. Ogan, “Mobile Learning 
During School Disruptions in Sub-Saharan Africa,” AERA Open, vol. 7, p. 
233285842110148, Jan. 2021, doi: 10.1177/23328584211014860. 
[16] 
Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK and K. Jordan, “Learners and caregivers barriers and 
attitudes to SMS-based mobile learning in Kenya,” Afr. Educ. Res. J., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 
665–679, Dec. 2023, doi: 10.30918/AERJ.114.23.088. 

10  Experimental Evidence on the Impact of an AI- Math Tutor in Ghana 
 
[17] 
R. F. Kizilcec and M. Chen, “Student Engagement in Mobile Learning via Text Message,” 
in Proceedings of the Seventh ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale, Virtual Event USA: 
ACM, Aug. 2020, pp. 157–166. doi: 10.1145/3386527.3405921. 
[18] 
S. B. Morris, “Estimating Effect Sizes From Pretest-Posttest-Control Group Designs,” Or-
gan. 
Res. 
Methods, 
vol. 
11, 
no. 
2, 
pp. 
364–386, 
Apr. 
2008, 
doi: 
10.1177/1094428106291059. 
[19] 
J. Hattie, Visible learning: a synthesis of over 800 meta-analyses relating to achievement, 
Reprinted. London: Routledge, 2010. 
[20] 
M. A. Kraft, “Interpreting Effect Sizes of Education Interventions,” Educ. Res., vol. 49, 
no. 4, pp. 241–253, May 2020, doi: 10.3102/0013189X20912798. 
 
