VERSION: October 2024
EdWorkingPaper No. 24-1031
What Impacts Should We Expect from 
Tutoring at Scale? Exploring Meta-Analytic 
Generalizability
U.S. public schools are engaged in an unprecedented effort to expand tutoring in the wake of the COVID-19 
pandemic. Broad-based support for scaling tutoring emerged, in part, because of the large effects on student 
achievement found in prior meta-analyses. We conduct an expanded meta-analysis of 265 randomized 
controlled trials and explore how estimates change when we better align our sample with a policy-relevant 
target of inference: large-scale tutoring programs in the U.S. aiming to improve standardized test performance. 
Pooled effect sizes from studies with stronger target-equivalence remain meaningful but are only a third to a 
half as large as those from our full sample. This result is driven by stark declines in pooled effect sizes as 
program scale increases. We explore four hypotheses for this pattern and document how a bundled package of 
recommended design features serves to partially inoculate programs from these attenuated effects at scale.
Suggested citation: Kraft, Matthew A., Beth E. Schueler, and Grace Falken. (2024). What Impacts Should We Expect from Tutoring 
at Scale? Exploring Meta-Analytic Generalizability. (EdWorkingPaper: 24-1031). Retrieved from Annenberg Institute at Brown 
University: https://doi.org/10.26300/zygj-m525
Matthew A. Kraft
Brown University
Beth E. Schueler
University of Virginia
Grace Falken
Brown University

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
1 
1 
What Impacts Should We Expect from Tutoring at Scale?  
Exploring Meta-Analytic Generalizability 
 
 
Matthew A. Kraft 
Brown University 
 
Beth E. Schueler 
University of Virginia 
 
Grace T. Falken 
Brown University 
 
 
October 2024 
 
 
Abstract 
 
U.S. public schools are engaged in an unprecedented effort to expand tutoring in the wake of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Broad-based support for scaling tutoring emerged, in part, because of the 
large effects on student achievement found in prior meta-analyses. We conduct an expanded 
meta-analysis of 265 randomized controlled trials and explore how estimates change when we 
better align our sample with a policy-relevant target of inference: large-scale tutoring programs 
in the U.S. aiming to improve standardized test performance. Pooled effect sizes from studies 
with stronger target-equivalence remain meaningful but are only a third to a half as large as those 
from our full sample. This result is driven by stark declines in pooled effect sizes as program 
scale increases. We explore four hypotheses for this pattern and document how a bundled 
package of recommended design features serves to partially inoculate programs from these 
attenuated effects at scale.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author Note: Correspondence regarding the manuscript can be sent to Matthew Kraft at mkraft@brown.edu. 
This research was generously supported by the National Science Foundation and the William T. Grant 
Foundation. We are grateful for research assistance from Luyan Nguyen, Samuel Lynch, Hannah Sexton, 
Virginia Lovison, Sara White, Marlene Almanzar Garcia, Audrey Whitten, Leo Gordon, Halle Bryant, Jay 
Philbrick, Deena Haque, Tommy Bellaire, Summer Dain, Stephanie Tu, Minerva Lopez, Mary Lau, Charlotte 
DeVaughn, Eli Talbert, Margaret Brehm, Meagan Thompson, Isabelle Saillard, Gabrielle Oliver, among others 
at Brown University and the University of Virginia. We also appreciate feedback from Elizabeth Tipton, 
Matthew Steinberg, Alan Safran, along with participants in the Program on Education Policy and Governance 
Colloquium at the Harvard Kennedy School, the National School Support Accelerator Annual Conference at 
Stanford University, the Society for Research on Educational Effectiveness Annual Conference, and the 
Syracuse University, Maxwell School lecture series.   
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
2 
2 
Introduction  
 
We are living in a rare moment where a collective effort is underway to change one of the 
core organizing principles of modern schooling. Historically, education – both formal and 
informal – was primarily an individualized endeavor with tutors and pupils or master craftsmen 
and apprentices working together, one-on-one. The rise of large-scale public education systems 
over the last two centuries evolved around a different organizing principle – one in which 
teachers became charged with the task of educating entire classrooms of students (Tyack, 1974). 
While teaching students in groups allowed these systems to expand access rapidly, it also created 
substantial challenges for educators to meet the full spectrum of students’ individual needs.  
 
The COVID-19 pandemic toppled the precarious balance teachers have long tried to 
achieve between whole-class instruction and differentiated instruction. The public health crisis 
caused widespread school closures as well as acute hardships for many families. In the U.S., 
researchers estimate that median student achievement fell 0.24 standard deviations (SD) in math 
and 0.13 SD in reading, with even larger declines among low-achieving students (Callen et al., 
2024). The pandemic both exacerbated longstanding inequalities in student achievement and 
created a shared priority to accelerate learning. This crisis caused the historical pendulum to start 
swinging back towards individualized instruction as a means of meeting the needs of all students.  
In the months following the pandemic, a rare consensus emerged among policymakers, 
researchers, and practitioners that tutoring had a critical role to play in addressing the educational 
harms caused by COVID-19. Integrating tutoring into the public education system at scale has 
become a primary policy response to pandemic-related learning disruptions. Unlike previous 
unfunded attempts to scale tutoring, such as President Clinton’s America Reads initiative, the 
federal government and individual states catalyzed these efforts with substantial financial 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
3 
3 
investments (NSSA, 2023). The federal Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief 
Fund (ESSER) provided $190 billion to public schools and required districts to spend a sizable 
fraction of this on student learning acceleration (including 20% of the third wave of ESSER 
funding) (Goldhaber & Falken, 2024). One estimate projects that states and districts have so far 
spent over $3 billion of this aid on tutoring (DiMarco & Jordan, 2022).  
 Efforts to scale tutoring after COVID-19’s onset appear to have substantially expanded 
access to individualized instruction in U.S. public schools. The nationally representative School 
Pulse Survey found that by December of 2022, 37% of schools reported offering high-dosage 
tutoring, defined as “Tutoring that takes place for at least 30 minutes per session, one on one or 
in small group instruction, offered three or more times per week, is provided by educators or 
well-trained tutors, [and] aligns with an evidence-based core curriculum or program.” This 
statistic increases to 59% when schools were asked if they offer more standard tutoring defined 
as a less intensive and structured approach to individualized instruction. At the same time, 
districts have yet to implement these programs at the scale or dosage many believe is required to 
support a full academic recovery (Goldhaber et al., 2022). Only 20% of schools that reported 
offering high-dosage tutoring (and 15% that offered standard tutoring) strongly agreed that they 
were able to effectively provide tutoring to all students in need.  
Efforts to expand access to tutoring were, in many ways, evidence-based policy. Meta-
analyses conducted by several independent research teams that reviewed randomized controlled 
trials (RCTs) of tutoring programs have all found large effects of tutoring on test-based measures 
of achievement in the range of 0.3 to 0.4 SD (Dietrichson et al., 2017; Fryer, 2017; Inns et al., 
2019; Nickow et al., 2020, 2024; Pellegrini et al., 2021). These effects are roughly equal to an 11 
to 15 percentile point increase, or the amount of learning in reading that upper elementary 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
4 
4 
students in the U.S. typically make in an entire school year (Hill et al., 2008). These impressive 
findings played a central role in motivating calls by policymakers and researchers – including 
ourselves (Kraft & Falken, 2021; Robinson et al., 2021) – to advocate for scaling tutoring. 
Influential technologists such as Mark Zuckerberg and Sal Khan have extolled the moonshot-like 
potential of tutoring, evoking the eye-popping 2 SD effects found in small-scale studies 
conducted by University of Chicago doctoral students under the supervision of Benjamin Bloom 
in the 1980s. However, scholars have recently raised new critiques about Bloom’s 2-sigma 
studies (Barnum, 2018; von Hippel, 2024) and the generalizability of pooled effect sizes 
generated from meta-analytic reviews (Dahabreh et al., 2020; Littell, 2024; Slough & Tyson, 
2023).  
In this paper, we conduct an expanded and updated meta-analysis of RCTs evaluating 
tutoring programs to explore the external validity of pooled effect size estimates. The common 
empirical focus on RCTs bolsters the internal validity of meta-analytic estimates, allowing 
researchers to draw credible inferences about the causal impacts of tutoring programs on student 
outcomes. However, despite combining findings from a wide variety of settings, samples, and 
treatments, meta-analytic reviews of experimental studies with small to medium non-probability 
samples do not necessarily produce estimates that generalize to broader efforts to scale tutoring 
(Littell, 2024). As many scholars have highlighted, strong internal validity does not beget broad 
external validity (Banerjee & Duflo, 2009; Esterling et al., 2024; Pritchett & Sandefur, 2015).  
We seek to answer the question: What expectations should we have for tutoring effects 
on standardized test scores for large-scale programs implemented in the U.S.? We address this 
question by generating pooled effect sizes from a sample of 265 RCTs published between 1967 
and 2023 and examining the sensitivity of our results to sample restrictions that better align our 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
5 
5 
estimates with a specific, policy-relevant target of inference: large-scale tutoring programs in the 
U.S. aiming to improve achievement on standardized tests. Consistent with prior meta-analyses, 
we find a large, pooled effect size of 0.42 SD on student achievement across our full sample. 
These effects are driven, in part, by the strikingly large effects of literacy tutoring programs in 
elementary grades (0.46 - 0.48 SD), which constitute 73% of the estimates in our sample.  
 
Our analyses reveal a stark pattern of declining effects of tutoring programs when taken 
to scale. When we restrict our sample to larger-scale tutoring programs implemented in the U.S. 
and evaluated based on third-party standardized assessments, our pooled estimates shrink to a 
third to a half the size of our unrestricted estimates. This difference is largely due to restricting 
the sample to large-scale programs. In our preferred analytic samples, we estimate a pooled 
effect size of 0.21 SD for programs serving 400 to 999 students and 0.16 SD for programs 
serving 1,000 students or more. We view these effects both as more plausible for large-scale 
programs and as still having considerable policy importance given their meaningful magnitude 
and strong external validity. Still, such effects for tutoring at scale are far from guaranteed. We 
observe considerable variation across individual tutoring program effects, and estimates from 
quasi-experimental studies of programs serving thousands of students are often even smaller. 
 
We then explore several hypotheses that might explain the pattern of declining effects 
with scale – a widely documented phenomenon in the broader education research literature 
(Cheung & Slavin, 2016; Kraft, 2020, 2023). We find mixed evidence that the declining results 
are an artifact of selective reporting due to publication bias or p-hacking. It is possible, however, 
that the common practice to use the within-sample standard deviation to estimate effect sizes 
causes these estimates to be artificially larger for studies of smaller programs serving more 
targeted and homogenous populations. We also find evidence that some tutoring program design 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
6 
6 
features differ systematically across program size, with increasing student-teacher ratios and 
declining dosage. We suspect another possible explanation for declining effects with scale is that 
tutor effects are heterogeneous across students, causing the marginal effect of tutoring to decline 
as programs expand to serve more students that stand to benefit somewhat less. Finally, we also 
find evidence from recent studies that implementation quality often declines at scale.  
 
Encouragingly, we do find that a combination of tutoring program design features 
identified in the research literature as best practices somewhat buffers against the large decline in 
effects we find at scale. However, schools and districts are often motivated to expand tutoring 
while operating within budget constraints. This creates a tension between maintaining fidelity to 
best practices and supporting more students. We conclude by examining how common 
approaches to addressing scaling challenges, such as high program costs and limited tutor 
supply, might affect program efficacy at scale. We find generally inconclusive evidence about 
the ability to maintain program efficacy when tutoring is delivered online, when student-tutor 
ratios are increased, and when dosage is decreased. We find suggestive evidence that peer 
tutoring may offer a cost-effective model for scaling.   
 
Our study makes several contributions to literature. We extend prior tutoring meta-
analyses by compiling a sample of 265 RCTs, roughly three times the number of studies as the 
largest prior reviews. This large sample allows us to explore how our overall effect size estimates 
compare to those for sub-samples of studies that are more aligned to the target of inference used 
by many researchers and policymakers. Second, our study also serves as an applied example of 
why it is critical to attend to external validity when conducting meta-analytic reviews and 
engaging in evidence-based policymaking. Finally, our analyses generate important insights to 
inform ongoing efforts to take tutoring to scale within the U.S. public school systems in a 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
7 
7 
sustainable way. Our findings provide stronger, more externally valid evidence to support 
investments in tutoring, while also recalibrating expectations towards more plausible gains for 
students. 
Methods 
Literature Search Procedures 
 
We began by searching for articles in seven electronic databases, including Academic 
Search Premier, APA PsychInfo, AEA EconLit, ERIC, Google Scholar, Science Direct, and Web 
of Science. We also searched two working paper series, from the Brown University Annenberg 
Institute and the National Bureau of Economic Research, to ensure we captured studies not yet 
published in peer-reviewed outlets (Alexander, 2020; Pigott & Polanin, 2020). Searching this 
range of sources was essential to minimize the extent to which we were missing key research, 
especially work produced by scholars from historically marginalized groups (Boveda et al., 
2023). Our search terms included keywords related to (a) tutoring (e.g., “tutor”), (b) educational 
contexts (e.g., “school”), and (c) impact evaluation research methods (e.g., “RCT”). We used 
Boolean operators between all terms, specifically “OR” between terms within each of these three 
keyword categories, many of which were synonyms, and “AND” between each of the three 
categories to maximize the relevance of search results without overlooking key studies. We 
identified 45 preexisting reviews and meta-analyses of tutoring-related interventions and scanned 
the reference lists of these for new studies. We supplemented this search by monitoring social 
media and email newsletters from research centers. We continued our literature search through 
the end of 2023, the cutoff date for studies we formally coded. Though we stopped coding new 
studies, we continued to track newly released studies and incorporate several into our narrative 
synthesis and discussion. Our search generated over 14,000 studies. After removing duplicates, 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
8 
8 
we followed Pigott and Polanin (2020) and had two team members conduct an initial screening 
for relevance using titles and abstracts. This left 1,347 studies that we subjected to an in-depth 
inclusion review of the full texts, ultimately resulting in a final analytic sample of 265 studies.  
Inclusion Criteria 
 
To identify our analytic sample, we assessed studies against eight inclusion criteria: 1) 
human tutoring, 2) 1:1 or in small groups, 3) focused on academics, 4) measured effects on 
standardized tests in math or reading, 5) K-12 students, 6) in an OECD country, 7) RCT design, 
and 8) randomized more than 20 students or 4 classrooms. First, programs under study needed to 
meet a broad definition of tutoring: one non-parental individual providing academic support to a 
single student or small group of students. We excluded studies of individualized instruction 
provided by a book, computer program, or other curricular tool without the direct support of a 
human tutor. While we included studies of programs where the tutor was a teacher, 
paraprofessional, college student, volunteer, or peer, we excluded studies of parent tutoring 
programs because all relevant studies we identified evaluated models of parent training or 
professional development rather than direct parent-child instruction. Second, the tutoring 
intervention must have been implemented with either a 1:1 student-tutor ratio or in groups of 8 or 
fewer students.1 Third, the tutoring content had to focus on academic subjects. This excluded, for 
example, studies of mentoring or socioemotional interventions without an academic component. 
Fourth, our focus on academic interventions also meant that studies needed to report effects on 
academic outcomes, specifically standardized tests and researcher-generated assessments 
measuring performance in either reading or math. We excluded studies where the only outcome 
was a non-test academic measure (e.g., GPA, attendance) because the sample of these studies 
 
1 We recognize not everyone would characterize instruction in groups of 5-8 as an authentic tutoring program. We 
include such programs because authors commonly applied this term and because it allowed us to cast a wide net.  

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
9 
9 
was too small to facilitate broad comparisons. Fifth, the tutees had to K-12 students. This 
excluded studies of tutoring in early childhood settings, of college or graduate students, and of 
adults. Sixth, the intervention had to take place in a member country of the Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) given our primary focus was on informing 
policy in the U.S. (a high-income nation). Seventh, we limited our sample to RCT designs to 
parallel prior reviews and given RCTs’ relative advantage at isolating causal impacts. That said, 
we supplement our meta-analysis with a synthetic review of recent quasi-experimental studies, 
which helps us consider tutoring impacts at a scale not captured by most RCTs. Finally, the 
studies had to have a sample size of more than 20 students when randomization occurred at the 
student level, or more than four classrooms or schools when randomization was at the classroom 
or school level.  
 
We also applied inclusion criteria to the effects reported and coded all qualifying 
estimates from each study. First, the effect estimates had to examine the same outcome as the 
subject of the tutoring (i.e., we dropped estimates of the impact of math tutoring on reading 
achievement). Second, we focused on treatment-control contrasts that isolated tutoring whenever 
possible, dropping estimates where the control condition involved tutoring-like programs and 
comparisons between treatment arms without a pure no-tutoring control group. However, we 
included studies in which we judged tutoring to be a key element of a larger set of interventions 
and reforms that together were evaluated against a business-as-usual control group. Finally, we 
prioritized estimates from reduced form models that capture the effect of offering tutoring. We 
view these intent-to-treat estimates as the relevant impact for the types of inferences 
policymakers often make about what the effect of a program will be as implemented at scale.  
Coding Procedures 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
10 
10 
Our research team of 20 coders double coded each study in our sample. Coders were 
trained on a common set of studies until they achieved a consistently high agreement rate with 
master codes created by our most experienced coders. After coding each study independently, 
coders then met to reconcile any differences and arrive at a final set of codes. When a pair of 
coders felt that the reconciliation was not straightforward, they brought questions to the principal 
investigators for a final determination. The team kept a record of decision rules that resulted 
from these meetings to ensure consistency across coders and over time.  
 
Our codebook included 128 codes that we grouped into five categories. Some codes 
varied at the study-level while others varied at the intervention- or estimate-level. The first group 
of codes catalogued study information such as publication type (e.g., peer-reviewed article, 
working paper) and publication year. The second group tracked information about the context in 
which the study occurred such as the country, school level, and participant demographics. The 
third set covered information about the intervention itself and the treatment/control contrast (e.g., 
student-tutor ratio, the dosage, tutor type). The fourth category was information on the methods 
used by the study’s authors such as the level of assignment to treatment, whether standard errors 
were clustered at the appropriate level, and whether we had concerns about attrition or 
contamination of the randomization. The fifth set included information about the effects, 
including estimated effect sizes, standard errors, sample sizes, and outcome instruments.  
We highlight one key code that we use throughout our analyses: the number of treated 
students. Prior meta-analytic reviews often explore how effect sizes vary by the total sample size 
of an evaluation. We take a somewhat different approach given our focus on identifying studies 
that are more closely aligned to a specific target of inference. We code the number of students 
randomly assigned to receive treatment as an estimate of the number of treated students. 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
11 
11 
Although we are conceptually interested in the actual number of students who participated in 
tutoring, this quantity was not consistently reported across studies. Thus, our code for the 
number of treated students serves as an upper bound of the actual size of the tutoring program.  
Calculating Effect Sizes 
Study authors reported treatment effects in a variety of ways. Whenever they were 
available, we defaulted to relying on standardized effect sizes generated from linear regressions 
estimating standardized mean differences between the treatment and control group, often 
controlling for baseline covariates. One advantage of model-based estimates is that the 
associated standard errors typically account for the ways data may be clustered, as recommended 
by Hedges (2007). When these estimates (and/or their associated standard errors) were 
unstandardized, we standardized them using unadjusted pre-treatment control group SD 
whenever possible (if unavailable, we used pooled SD). In other cases, we estimated a 
standardized effect size using the pre-post treatment means, SD, and sample sizes for the 
treatment and control group. For each estimate, we then calculated a Hedges’ g effect size, 
correcting for upward bias present for small-sample studies (Borenstein et al., 2009) as follows:   
𝑔∗ = $1 − 
3
4(𝑛" + 𝑛#) −9. 𝑔 
Here, 𝑔∗ is the corrected effect size estimate, 𝑛" is the number of treated units (i.e., students or 
classrooms), 𝑛# is the number of comparison units, and 𝑔 is the uncorrected effect size estimate.  
Meta-Analytic Approach 
We generated our pooled standardized effect size estimates using robust variance 
estimation (RVE) meta-analytic methods (Hedges et al., 2010). Like other meta-analytic 
techniques, this approach up-weights effects estimated with greater precision, but RVE is unique 
in that it also accounts for the nesting of impact estimates within clusters. We often observe 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
12 
12 
multiple estimates for a given study (for example, when there are multiple outcomes or 
interventions examined in a single study) and therefore model this most prevalent type of 
dependency, as recommended by Tanner-Smith and Tipton (2014). We fit the following model:  
𝑌$%
& = 𝛽'
& + 𝑢%
& + 𝜀$%
& 
where 𝑌$%
& represents an impact estimate i on outcome k (either math, reading, or stacking 
subjects together in a single analysis) from study j. 𝛽'
& is the overall weighted average impact of 
tutoring on outcome k and 𝑢%
& is a study-level random effect. 𝜀$%
& is the residual of a specific 
effect size estimate from the average effect within its study. In addition to pooled effect estimates 
and associated standard errors, we also report prediction intervals for select estimates to describe 
the degree of heterogeneity in our sample and to illustrate the range of plausible effects 
policymakers might expect for an individual tutoring program (Borenstein et al., 2017).  
Towards More Credible Estimates of Program Design Feature Effects 
Researchers have typically explored the relative importance of various program features 
by comparing the pooled effect sizes of tutoring programs with different features. This approach 
is limited, however, because program features are often bundled and could be correlated with 
unobserved aspects of program quality (Tipton et al., 2023). We attempt to reduce these potential 
biases using meta-regressions to examine which moderators predict larger impact estimates, 
conditional on other study and program design features. We estimate the following model: 
𝑌$%
& = 𝛽'
& + Γ𝑋$/% + 𝑢%
& + 𝜀$%
& 
Here, we include a vector of study and intervention features (Γ𝑋$/%). While this model does not 
allow us to isolate the causal impact of a particular intervention feature on student outcomes, it 
does allow us to tease apart which of the observable study and intervention characteristics are 
driving the largest differences in effect size estimates. When possible, we complement these 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
13 
13 
analyses with results from multi-arm RCTs that randomly assign students to tutoring programs 
that differ only by a single design feature. These studies provide credible causal estimates of the 
effect of specific program design features but are often underpowered to detect small to medium 
differences in effects produced by modifying only one aspect of a tutoring program. 
Target of Inference 
 
Our aim is to draw inferences about tutoring programs that are most relevant for the 
target, context, outcomes, and scale of tutoring programs envisioned by U.S. policymakers. 
Specifically, we hope to inform the expectations of leaders who are seeking to address overall 
declines and growing gaps in academic outcomes post-COVID by integrating tutoring into the 
U.S. K-12 public school system. We imagine that because leaders are being held accountable for 
results on statewide standardized exams that assess a broad set of basic skills, policymakers will 
be more interested in tutoring impacts on standardized exams that measure general skills as 
opposed to assessments that measure narrower sets of skills or that are designed by researchers to 
align tightly with the focal content of the tutoring intervention. Furthermore, our U.S.-centric 
policy focus makes studies conducted in the U.S. likely to be the most relevant for our target of 
inference.  
A central motivation for our work is to inform efforts to significantly expand access to 
tutoring programs. We therefore aim to draw inferences about reasonable expectations for the 
impacts of tutoring programs implemented at scale, as opposed to small-scale pilot programs. 
Throughout the paper we present estimates of pooled effects sizes across four bins of program 
size: 0-99, 100-399, 400-999, and 1,000 or more students. We can approximate the relevance of 
these bin sizes for tutoring programs through a back-of-the-envelope calculation.  

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
14 
14 
Survey data from the “School Pulse Panel” (SPP) show that among districts offering 
high-dosage tutoring, approximately 28% of district students participate (NCES, 2024). This 
likely represents a lower bound estimate of the total need for high-dosage tutoring, given that 
37% of 4th graders scored below basic on the 2022 National Assessment of Education Progress 
exam in reading and 38% of 8th graders scored below basic in math. Assuming districts target an 
average of 28% of students for tutoring, these bins partition public school districts at the 22nd, 
57th, and 80th percentiles of district size.2 Importantly, even though these bins capture a similar 
number of districts, the number of students in each bin is highly skewed towards the larger 
program sizes. Districts in the 0-99 program size bin serve 1% of all public school students, 100-
399 8%, 400-999 15%, and 1,000+ 76%. Although only 20% of districts might intend to build 
tutoring programs that serve 1,000 students or more, roughly three-fourths of all public school 
students attend districts of this size, making it a policy-relevant focus of our analysis.  
Findings 
Characteristics of Included Studies  
 
Our final analytic sample includes 265 RCTs that evaluate 340 distinct tutoring 
interventions. We present characteristics of these studies at the study/RCT-level in Table 1. Our 
sample skews towards recent research with almost two-thirds of included reports published in the 
years since 2009 and almost 80% in the last 20 years. Only five studies in our sample assess 
interventions implemented since the beginning of the pandemic, almost all of which provided 
remote tutoring, giving us limited power to disentangle virtual delivery from the pandemic 
context. Three-fourths of studies in our sample are peer-reviewed journal articles. The modal 
study examined a tutoring program in an urban, public school setting.  
 
2 Corresponding district size for the four bins is 1-357; 358-1,428; 1,429-3,571, and 3,572 or more students.  

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
15 
15 
 
Our sample reflects substantial imbalance in the subject, grade-level, and size of tutoring 
programs evaluated in the literature, as illustrated by the evidence gap maps shown in Figures 1 
and 2 (Polanin et al., 2023). Most of the studies assess literacy tutoring among early elementary 
school students (51%) and programs serving fewer than 100 students (59%). This concentration 
on small elementary reading programs is worth noting because if impacts differ across grade-
levels, subjects, or with program scale, pooled results based on our full sample may not be 
immediately generalizable to other program types. 
 
We provide further details on the characteristics of the programs evaluated in each of 
these studies in Table 2. Most interventions were delivered in-person (97%), at school (86%), 
during school hours (76%), using a 2:1 student-tutor ratio or less (62%), and with a provided 
curriculum (89%). Although individual tutoring was the modal approach (46%), student-tutor 
ratios varied widely across the sample. We observe greater variation in design choices across the 
features of tutor type, dosage, and whether students were pulled out of class for tutoring.  
Full Sample Estimates of Tutoring Impacts 
 
Similar to prior tutoring meta-analyses, we find notably large, pooled effect sizes across 
our full sample of studies. As shown in Table 3, we estimate that the average effect on student 
achievement of a broad variety of tutoring interventions subjected to rigorous evaluation via 
RCTs is 0.42 SD when stacking math and reading achievement impacts. The associated 
prediction interval ranges from -0.31 SD to 1.16 SD, illustrating the considerable heterogeneity 
of impacts we might expect across individual tutoring programs. This large average effect is 
driven, in part, by the pooled effects of literacy tutoring in lower and upper elementary grades of 
0.46 and 0.48 SD, respectively, which make up a large portion of our sample (84%). That said, 
the pooled effects of tutoring on math achievement are still quite large (0.39 SD). We find 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
16 
16 
inconsistent patterns in tutoring effect size across schooling levels by subject. Impacts of reading 
tutoring for elementary school students are substantially larger than for middle and high school 
students. In math, we find the largest effects at the high school level (0.55 SD) followed by upper 
elementary (0.44 SD). However, for both subjects, we only observe a small sample of high 
school program effects (13 estimates for math and 27 for reading). The magnitudes of effects are 
still moderate to large for the school levels and subjects with the smallest pooled effects (0.33 
SD for lower elementary math and 0.16 SD for high school reading). 
Sensitivity Analyses 
 
We next explore whether our pooled estimates are robust to a variety of sensitivity checks 
in Table 4. First, we examine whether results differ for studies that may have lower internal 
validity due to quality concerns with the randomization design or empirical analyses. For 
example, some authors described their methods as an RCT but indicated or intimated that 
students, teachers, parents, or administrators had some influence over whether a student ended up 
in the treatment or control group. Another example is when a sizable number of students were 
excluded from the analytic sample because of non-compliance, attrition, a move, or some other 
reason. When we separately examine results based on studies for which we did not have quality 
concerns, results remain essentially unchanged. Our results are slightly sensitive to excluding 
outlier effects. When we omit the top and bottom 2.5% of effect size observations the pooled 
effect size estimate drops to 0.38 SD, a decline that is largely driven by a reduction in pooled 
reading effects from 0.44 to 0.37 SD.3     
 
Finally, we examine whether estimates vary by the decade in which they were published 
as a rough proxy for study quality. Education research has taken major leaps in terms of 
 
3 The range of the lowest 2.5% of estimates was -1.70 to -0.34 SD. For the highest 2.5% of estimates, we observe a 
range of 2.24 to 8.06 SD. 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
17 
17 
methodological rigor and quality standards over the past three decades, particularly in applying 
causal inference methods (Angrist, 2004).4 As shown in Table 4, we find substantial variation in 
the magnitude of the pooled impacts based on publication decade, with larger estimates prior to 
2000 (0.45 SD) and between 2000 and 2009 (0.58 SD) than for those published between 2010 to 
2019 (0.38 SD). We observe the smallest impacts for the most recent studies published in 2020 
or after (0.27 SD), though even this is large in magnitude. We cannot definitively disentangle 
whether this variation in impacts is due to methodological changes, policy changes, or other 
study or program characteristic changes over time, but differences across decades remain even 
after we control for a host of study and program characteristics, as shown in Table 8. 
What expectations should we have for tutoring effects at scale?  
Evidence from our meta-analysis of experimental studies. In Table 5, we explore how 
our pooled effect size estimates change when we restrict our sample to more closely approximate 
our target of inference. Removing estimates that rely on assessments designed by the research 
team induces a modest 0.07 SD decline in our aggregate estimate. Removing studies conducted 
outside the U.S. only trivially reduces our pooled estimate by 0.03 SD. However, restricting the 
sample to studies that provided tutoring to incrementally larger groups of students profoundly 
changes the magnitude of our estimates. Using our full sample, we find that programs offering 
tutoring to fewer than 100 students have a pooled effect size of 0.55 SD, whereas programs 
tutoring between 100 and 399 students have a pooled effect size of 0.32 SD. As shown in Figure 
3, this estimate continues to decline – almost linearly – as we further restrict the sample such that 
 
4 Another reason we chose to examine effects by decade is because the decades roughly correspond to major periods 
of education policy development, with the pre-2000 studies representing the period prior to universal test-based 
accountability, the 2000 to 2009 period representing the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) era, the time from 2010 to 
2019 as representing the push for common core standards and expanded teacher-based accountability as part of Race 
to the Top and NCLB waivers. Finally, we view the 2020 to present period as representing the post-COVID era. 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
18 
18 
pooled effects for programs serving between 400 and 999 students and 1,000 or more students 
have an average effect of 0.25 SD and 0.14 SD, respectively.  
When we apply both sample restrictions to best approximate our target of inference, we 
arrive at our preferred set of estimates presented in Panel D of Table 5. These impacts range 
from 0.21 SD to 0.16 SD for U.S. tutoring programs evaluated using standardized test outcomes 
and operating at a scale of 400 to 999 and 1,000 or more students. There are four important 
points to highlight about this preferred set of estimates. First, they are between a third and a half 
as large as the pooled estimate using our full meta-analytic sample, suggesting that inferences 
made using the broader sample are not well-calibrated to tutoring programs at scale. Second, 
effect sizes between 0.16 SD and 0.21 SD are of medium to large magnitude and still very 
impressive for large-scale education interventions (Kraft, 2020). Third, our pooled effect size 
estimate for programs serving 1,000 students or more is very imprecisely estimated given the 
limited number of RCTs of tutoring programs at this scale that meet our target-of-inference-
aligned inclusion criteria. Fourth, the wide prediction intervals associated with these estimates 
suggest that we should expect tutoring program effects to vary considerably, with some 
individual programs producing quite small or even negative effects and others resulting in 
sizable gains. We further test the robustness of this pattern of results by omitting estimates that 
are outliers and those from studies published since 2010, as shown in Panels E-G of Table 5 and 
Figure 3. This reduces the magnitude of the pooled effect size estimates among small-scale 
studies, but the overall pattern of declines at scale remains unchanged.  
Evidence from large-scale non-experimental studies. Meta-analytic reviews of the 
literature on tutoring frequently restrict their focus to studies that employ RCTs in an effort to 
ensure researchers are identifying the unbiased, causal effect of tutoring. This restriction 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
19 
19 
strengthens the internal validity of the pooled effect sizes, but may also limit the external validity 
of these findings (Tipton & Olsen, 2018). Large-scale RCTs are expensive and often require the 
active consent of participants, making them financially and logistically challenging to conduct. 
Our meta-analytic sample contains only nine studies that evaluate programs serving at least 
1,000 students. This sparse data makes it difficult to accurately project plausible effects from 
tutoring programs taken to scale in larger U.S. school districts given a lack of common support. 
 
We attempt to further inform our understanding of the plausible effects of tutoring by 
turning to studies of large-scale programs (n treated ≥ 1,000) that employ quasi-experimental 
methods. Much of the literature evaluating large-scale programs focuses on after-school tutoring 
provided by private tutoring organizations and funded by two federal initiatives, 21st Century 
Learning Centers and Supplemental Educational Services (SES) under the No Child Left Behind 
Act. Studies of these initiatives often evaluate programs across large districts and entire states 
with thousands of treated students and find effects that are notably smaller than those we find 
with our full meta-analytic sample (Deke et al., 2012; Heinrich et al., 2010, 2014; James-
Burdumy et al., 2005; Ross et al., 2008; Springer et al., 2014; Zimmer et al., 2009, 2010). These 
small to medium effects (frequently ≤ 0.10 SD) may be fully explained by poor attendance at 
these off-site afterschool programs and their design features such as large student-tutor ratios and 
rotating tutors. However, the scale of the programs may also have contributed to their 
underwhelming results by influencing program design choices and implementation quality (see 
Kraft & Falken, 2020 for a fuller discussion). 
 
Three recent studies from the post-COVID era provide more relevant assessments of 
ongoing attempts to integrate tutoring in the U.S. public school system at scale. Carbonari, 
Dewey, et al. (2024) evaluate the efforts of four mid- to large-sized districts to support students’ 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
20 
20 
academic recovery in math during the 2021-22 academic year by providing tutoring and 
additional instructional time. Using a value-added framework, they find estimates that are 
uniformly smaller than 0.04 SD and often precisely estimated null effects. These small impacts 
should be interpreted in the context of the first year of these large-scale initiatives when student 
attendance and staffing remained critical challenges for most districts. However, this same team 
of researchers have expanded their analyses to evaluate the effect of tutoring and small-group 
instruction across eight districts during the 2022-23 academic year and found similar results 
(Carbonari, DeArmond, et al., 2024). They document statistically insignificant estimates of the 
average effects of tutoring and small-group instruction of 0.03 SD in math and 0.07 SD in 
reading when pooling across tutoring programs that jointly served over 12,000 students.  
Kraft et al. (2024) study efforts to scale tutoring in Metro-Nashville Public Schools 
(MNPS) over the course of two and half years to serve over 4,000 students by the spring of 2023. 
In contrast to the districts studied by Carbonari and colleagues, MNPS was largely successful at 
engaging students to attend tutoring frequently and staffing their program at scale by hiring their 
own teachers as tutors. Using an event study design, they find medium effects of tutoring on 
standardized tests scores in reading (0.09 SD), but no effects on test scores in math, on average.  
 
Two recent evaluations of public tutoring programs implemented across the United 
Kingdom (U.K.) and in Victoria, Australia also provide early evidence of post-pandemic tutoring 
impacts at large scales in high-income contexts. Both analyses used matching methods that 
included baseline tests scores to reweight regression analyses, comparing the test score gains of 
tutored students to comparison-group students in the third year of these tutoring programs. 
Government Social Research, an evaluation agency within the U.K. Civil Service, found small to 
medium effects of the U.K. National Tutoring Programme on math (0.06 SD) and English 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
21 
21 
achievement (0.03 SD) among Key Stage 2 students (years 3-6), but no effects on the 
achievement of Key Stage 4 students (years 10-11) in either subject (math -0.01 SD; English -
0.00 SD) (Moore et al., 2024). The Victorian Auditor-General’s Office found no significant 
effects of the state-wide Tutor Learning Initiative on students’ achievement gains in math and 
reading across students in years 3 through 10 (Victorian Auditor-General’s Office, 2024). 
Together, these quasi-experimental studies of large-scale tutoring programs are consistent with 
the overall pattern of declining tutoring impacts as program size increases. 
Why do tutoring effects decline at scale? 
 
The phenomenon of interventions becoming less effective when they are delivered to 
more students is a well-documented pattern in education research (Cheung & Slavin, 2016; 
Kraft, 2020, 2023). Understanding why this pattern exists for tutoring programs is critical to 
informing efforts to expand access to tutoring and maintain its effectiveness at scale. We posit 
and test four primary hypotheses that might explain this pattern.  
Hypothesis #1: Declining effects do not reflect a true phenomenon but are instead due 
to selective reporting, standardization techniques, and/or spillover. It is possible that the 
negative relationship between program effects and program size is a product of the research 
process rather than a real pattern of differential effects. First, such a pattern could be caused by 
selective reporting that is more acute among studies with smaller samples. Here we define 
selective reporting as the phenomenon where studies that produce statistically insignificant 
results are less likely to result in academic publications. This could occur through multiple 
mechanisms including researchers being less likely to write papers when they find null results, 
researchers making subjective modeling decisions that push preferred estimates over traditional 
significance thresholds (i.e., p-hacking), and journals being less likely to publish studies that find 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
22 
22 
null results (i.e., publication bias). Of course, researchers could also be systematically designing 
studies of programs that are likely to have larger effects to also have smaller sample sizes given 
less statistical power is necessary to detect larger effects.  
We explore potential bias in three ways given that no single test can definitely rule out 
publication bias (McShane et al., 2016). First, we produce funnel plots and conduct a trim and 
fill analysis (Duval & Tweedie, 2000) to assess the degree of symmetry of our point estimates 
around the meta-analytic mean. An imbalance in publications falling on either side of vertical 
line at the center of the full plot would suggest potential bias, and lead the studies being imputed 
to make the data more symmetric. We do this at both the individual effect-size level and at the 
study level by collapsing multiple effects sizes to account for the nested nature of the data. As 
shown in Figure 4 and Appendix Table B1, we find no evidence of publication bias in our full 
sample of studies using this method. We then repeat these analyses after sub-setting our data into 
studies with fewer than 100 treated students versus at least 100 treated students and find no 
evidence of differential publication bias among small-sample studies.  
Second, we test for evidence of p-hacking bias by plotting the p-values from our sample 
of effect sizes and examine whether there is an excess mass of p-values just below conventional 
significance thresholds in these distributions, following the intuition of Brodeur et al. (2020).5 A 
visual inspection of Figure 5 reveals that the distribution of p-values is smooth across critical 
values for traditional significance thresholds in the full sample and in subsamples of smaller and 
larger sample studies. We then formally test for differential bunching below each conventional 
statistical threshold using a randomization test. This approach examines whether within a given 
 
5 We conduct these analyses using p-values rather than test statistics (i.e. Z-scores) because of the many small-
sample studies in our review. This allows us to look at a sharp discontinuity for significance which would not be 
possible using the test statistics where threshold values change relative to the sample size.  

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
23 
23 
window around a cut-point the p-values are binomial-distributed with equal probability. In Table 
6, we show that we find little evidence to suggest there is differential bunching of estimates with 
p-values just below the 0.05 and 0.10 significance thresholds, nor any evidence that p-hacking is 
more common among small-scale studies. Only one of the six tests we run in our full sample 
using three different bandwidths for each threshold is marginally significant. 
Our final test of selective reporting is to compare pooled effect sizes between peer-
reviewed publications and other types of studies, such as working papers or reports, that have not 
gone through the peer-review process. If selective reporting was occurring because journals have 
been less likely to publish non-significant findings, we would expect to see larger average 
estimates from peer-reviewed than non-peer-reviewed studies. In Table B2, we show that this is 
indeed the pattern we find. Specifically, we observe an average pooled effect from studies in 
peer-reviewed journals of 0.45 SD versus 0.22 SD for non-peer-reviewed reports. We also check 
for differences by publication type across subsamples of studies with different sample sizes. For 
both peer-reviewed and non-peer-reviewed studies, we observe smaller effects for larger-sample 
studies. However, for studies with at least 1,000 treated students, the effects are quite a bit 
smaller for non-peer-reviewed papers (0.09 SD) than for peer-reviewed studies (0.33 SD).  
We interpret these results with caution, especially given peer-reviewed status is 
correlated with other factors such as publication date. Our sample of non-peer-reviewed works 
skews more recent, and we know that more recent studies have demonstrated smaller pooled 
effects. These results are therefore not proof positive of selective reporting but are consistent 
with that possibility. In sum, we find mixed evidence on whether selective reporting could 
explain the pattern of declining pooled effects for programs implemented at a greater scale. 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
24 
24 
Publication bias is an area of active ongoing research and new methods for testing and 
addressing bias with clustered data may help us shed more light on this issue in the future.  
 
A second possible statistical explanation for the differential pattern of effect sizes across 
smaller and larger tutoring programs is due to the standardization process. Tutoring programs 
typically target students that fall within a specific range of the performance distribution. We find 
that 94% of the studies we include in our meta-analysis describe some type of efforts to target 
students, with 89% of studies evaluating programs that specifically targeted low-performing 
students. As Fitzgerald and Tipton (2024) document, this targeting results in samples recruited to 
participate in RCTs to be more homogenous than the population as a whole. Targeted sampling 
reduces the variation in achievement among the study sample, artificially inflating the magnitude 
of the effect sizes when researchers standardize their outcome measure using sample-based 
estimates of its standard deviation. It is possible, if not likely, that the overall effect sizes from 
meta-analyses of tutoring are somewhat inflated because of this practice. This may also help to 
explain the pattern of attenuated effects we find if smaller-scale tutoring programs are able to 
more precisely target students, resulting in even more homogenous participant populations 
compared to larger-scale programs. Said another way, the pattern of declining effects by program 
size might be less pronounced if all studies had used an estimate of the SD of their test score 
outcome derived from nationally representative populations.  
 
Finally, the presence of peer spillover effects could contribute to a differential pattern of 
tutoring effects by program size. A large body of evidence documents peer effects in K-12 
education settings (Barrios-Fernandez, 2023). If being in the same class or school as a student 
receiving tutoring has positive spillover effects on non-tutored students and the magnitude of 
these effects increases with the concentration of treated students in a class or school, then larger-

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
25 
25 
scale tutoring programs could differentially attenuate the treatment-control contrast and 
contribute to the pattern of declining effects we find. However, it is not obvious that this would 
happen in practice given that the concentration of treated students per class or school could be 
similar across smaller and larger programs if larger programs simply serve more schools.  
Hypothesis #2: Scaling causes programs to systematically alter key design features. A 
second potential explanation for declining effects with scale is that leaders systematically change 
the design of tutoring programs for larger versus smaller scale interventions. To assess the 
evidence for this hypothesis, we first explore how key program features, which past research has 
highlighted as important elements of effective tutoring programs, change as programs are taken 
to scale. Table 7 reveals two systematic differences in program design features when comparing 
smaller verses larger programs. First, larger programs are substantially less likely to tutor 
students individually. Programs serving over 400 students are roughly 10 percentage points less 
likely to rely on 1:1 student-tutor ratios than small programs that serve fewer than 100 students. 
Second, larger programs tend to deliver less dosage, primarily by shortening the number of 
weeks tutoring programs run. Here the relationship is not entirely monotonic, with the smallest 
tutoring programs offering moderate dosage, middle-sized tutoring programs with the highest 
total dosage and larger tutoring programs offering the least. For example, on average, programs 
that serve 100 to 399 students delivered 39 total tutoring hours while those serving greater than 
1,000 delivered 27 total hours. Unexpectedly, we see that larger programs are even slightly more 
likely to use teachers and paraprofessionals as tutors and to provide a high degree of supervision 
and support to tutors – characteristics hypothesized to promote larger effects.  
As another test, we examine whether the negative relationship between program effects 
and size is attenuated when we control for the full range of observable program characteristics in 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
26 
26 
a meta-regression framework. We do this by comparing the results of two meta-regressions. The 
first model shown in Table 8 reports coefficients from binned sample size indicators which 
capture the clear negative relationship relative to the omitted category of studies evaluating small 
programs serving fewer than 100 students. We then add a large set of control variables including 
indicators for the intersection of schooling-level and subject, researcher generated assessments, 
studies from international contexts, publication decade, and our full set of tutoring program 
characteristics. We find that the strength of the negative relationship between program size and 
effects is reduced by roughly 30%, suggesting changing program characteristics do account for a 
portion of the overall negative relationship between program size and effects on achievement. 
Notably, only a few study features and program characteristics appear systematically 
related to effect sizes when included in our fully controlled meta-analytic model. In addition to 
sample size, researcher-generated tests produce meaningfully larger effect sizes relative to third-
party standardized tests (0.22 SD), tutoring outside of the school day has a strong negative 
association with effect sizes relative to during the school day (-0.19 SD), and an indicator for 
studies that did not report a specific tutor-student ratio – perhaps suggestive of larger and flexible 
ratios – also has a strong negative association compared to those with a 1:1 ratio (-0.19 SD). We 
similarly find a negative association with using a specified tutor type not in our major categories, 
relative to a teacher (-0.16 SD), although this group mostly consists of community members 
and/or volunteers. While we find significant positive associations with two bins of total dosage 
hours relative to receiving at least 60 hours of treatment, these results don’t show a monotonic 
relationship between dosage and impacts, suggesting more systematic exploration is needed.  
Hypothesis #3: Heterogeneous tutoring effects cause the marginal student to benefit 
less as tutoring programs expand. The attenuation of tutoring effects as program sizes increase 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
27 
27 
may also be a product of the heterogeneous effects of tutoring across students. Prior research has 
found that tutoring may be more effective for students who are lower-performing prior to 
tutoring (Kraft, 2015; Robinson et al., 2024), Black students (Fryer & Howard-Noveck, 2020) 
and students from low-income families (Carlana & La Ferrara, 2024). It is plausible that smaller-
scale tutoring programs appear more effective because they are better able to target students who 
stand to benefit the most, on average, from the programming. As tutoring programs scale, they 
may be expanding to serve students who will benefit less, on average.  
 
We explore this by comparing weighted averages of student characteristics in our sample 
of RCTs, disaggregating by the size of the tutoring program, in Table 9. This comparison reveals 
a clear pattern where studies of smaller tutoring programs serve larger percentages of historically 
marginalized students. Students in smaller tutoring programs were 13 percentage points more 
likely to be English learners, 11 percentage points more likely to be receiving special education 
services, 8 percentage points more likely to be from low-income backgrounds, 4 percentage 
points more likely to be Hispanic, and 2 percentage points more likely to be Native American. 
These sizable differences in the characteristics of students served by smaller and larger tutoring 
programs are likely to attenuate the estimated effects of tutoring as program scale increases. 
 
A related possibility that we cannot directly test with our data is that smaller programs 
treat student populations that are more homogenous. Homogeneity may make implementation 
easier because there is less of a need to tailor interventions to a variety of student achievement 
levels or other unique needs. Expanding tutoring programs might mean programming is provided 
to a more diverse group of students with a wider set of challenges, making it more difficult to 
produce large impacts among increasingly heterogenous groups.    

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
28 
28 
Hypothesis #4: Implementation quality declines as tutoring programs scale. A final 
hypothesis for why we observe smaller impacts for larger programs is that the quality of program 
implementation declines as tutoring programs are brought to scale. Imagine, for example, two 
tutoring programs with the exact same intended program design features (e.g., high-dosage, 1:1 
ratios, paraprofessional tutors), but one serves a small number of students at a single school and 
the other is brought to scale districtwide. Administrative needs are likely higher for the large-
scale program. Small programs may be more likely to represent pilot efforts led by uniquely 
trail-blazing, motivated, and talented leaders, whereas administrators recruited to run large 
programs may not be as effective, on average. Implementation quality could also suffer if the 
effectiveness of the average tutor is lower for larger programs than for smaller programs. 
However, if tutoring screening tools are only weakly related to tutor performance, then tutor 
quality may not decline with scale (Davis et al., 2017). It may be more challenging to coordinate 
communication between tutors and teachers for large-scale programs. There may simply be less 
oversight with a greater number of tutoring sites, making it more difficult to ensure fidelity of 
implementation to program models for larger interventions. It may be that even if the intended 
program design remains constant as programs expand, the delivered dosage drops if student 
attendance suffers or time-on-task declines as programs expand. This would still be consistent 
with our pattern of results, given that our coding reflects intended measures of dosage rather than 
the actual number of total hours of tutoring treated students received.  
Unfortunately, most tutoring RCTs do not directly measure implementation quality, 
limiting what we can say about this hypothesis using our meta-analytic dataset. However, survey 
data and several recent studies on post-COVID tutoring efforts do point to significant 
implementation challenges. To start, the majority of K-12 public school principals report 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
29 
29 
experiencing barriers (e.g., funding, timing, or staffing challenges) that limited their ability to 
effectively provide tutoring on the nationally representative SPP survey (National Center for 
Education Statistics, 2024). The aforementioned “Road to Recovery” (R2R) evaluation of large-
scale academic recovery efforts by Carbonari, Dewey, et al. (2024) documents how districts fell 
well short of leaders’ intended expectations with regard to both the number of students served 
and the intensity of the interventions. Interviews with district leaders revealed challenges with 
engaging targeted students. This is consistent with SPP survey results showing that, among 
schools that provided tutoring, larger schools had somewhat lower student participation rates 
(National Center for Education Statistics, 2024). Research on an opt-in virtual tutoring program 
in the spring of 2021 further illustrates challenges related to low student participation, especially 
among struggling students who might benefit most from tutoring (Robinson et al., 2022).  
Buy-in is also a problem identified amongst staff. Programs that appeared to successfully 
scale high-quality tutoring after the pandemic emphasized the importance of district-level 
leadership, goal setting, buy-in from school leaders and teachers, a willingness to rethink 
scheduling, the pursuit of multiple funding sources, and the ability to make difficult choices 
about spending trade-offs (Cohen, 2024). Leaders in the R2R districts highlighted staffing 
challenges related to pandemic surges, a tight labor market, and limited district capacity for 
recruitment and human resources management. These issues of staffing challenges and 
organizational capacity are echoed by findings from a qualitative study on programs in two urban 
districts (Makori et al., 2024). These implementation challenges do not appear to be solely a 
function of acute post-pandemic conditions, as the R2R team’s follow up report examining 
academic recovery efforts during 2022-23 revealed that difficulties persisted (Carbonari, 
DeArmond, et al., 2024). Across the majority of interventions examined by the R2R study, 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
30 
30 
including tutoring, fewer students participated and for less time than intended. Consistent with 
our meta-analytic findings, the rare R2R tutoring programs that generated positive impacts on 
test scores were those implemented on a small scale. Finally, leaders interviewed for the R2R 
report also pointed to their need to adapt tutoring program designs—sometimes departing from 
best practices—to align with federal, state, and local policies. This is likely to remain a challenge 
as schools and districts look to a range of federal, state, and local funding sources to support 
tutoring programs after the COVID-relief funding runs dry (Accelerate, 2023; Cohen, 2024).   
How might policymakers approach the challenge of maintaining effectiveness at scale? 
Like so many complex interventions, the efficacy of tutoring programs may lie in the 
combination of program design features rather than any single characteristic. Prior literature has 
focused on a bundle of program features that research suggests are associated with larger effects, 
aligned with what is sometimes described as “high-quality,” “high-dosage,” or “high-impact” 
programs (e.g., Robinson et al., 2021). This bundle of features includes in-person programming, 
delivered at school during school hours, with a student-tutor ratio of no more than 3:1, meeting at 
least 3 times per week, ensuring a high overall dosage (which we proxy for with at least 15 hours 
of total tutoring), and using a provided curriculum.6 
When we test whether the combination of these features are greater than the sum of their 
parts, we find encouraging results. Specifically, the overall pattern of declining effect sizes 
persists among tutoring programs that utilize a bundled package of recommended design features 
but the attenuation at scale is less pronounced. When we isolate only individual features of this 
bundle, effects continue to erode to varying degrees as programs scale (Appendix Table B3). 
 
6 Sustained relationships between tutors and students and data-informed instruction based on formative assessments 
are also recommended. Unfortunately, most studies did not provide information to allow us to code these features. 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
31 
31 
That said, this erosion is milder for in-person programs providing at least 15 hours of tutoring. 
As shown in Figure 6, while the pooled effect among studies of programs serving between 100-
399 students declines by 42% relative to programs serving 99 students or fewer in the full 
sample, it only declines by 18% in the restricted sample of studies with the bundled package of 
design features. The decline among programs serving 400-999 students is also slightly less 
pronounced, dropping 54% in the full sample and 44% in the bundled package sample. Perhaps 
most striking is that when we restrict our analysis to studies evaluating U.S. programs based on 
standardized test measures published after 2009 and omit outliers, we see no attenuation of 
program effects across sample size, at least for programs serving fewer than 1,000 students.7  
What does the research suggest about modifying program design features to reduce costs 
and increase scalability? 
Although the bundled package of program features appears to help sustain program 
effectiveness at scale, several aspects are costly and can be difficult to implement at scale. Here 
we explore the potential implications of modifying specific program features. 
Moving Tutoring Online: Many districts and programs have adopted online tutoring to 
access a larger potential supply of tutors. How might this affect the efficacy of tutoring? When 
we limit our sample to the 59 estimates of tutoring delivered virtually (drawn from 6 unique 
studies), the pooled estimate reported in Table 11a is 0.07 SD.8 This is substantially smaller than 
the unadjusted pooled estimate of in-person program impacts of 0.44 SD and even substantially 
smaller than our preferred pooled estimates of expected impacts for our target of inference, 0.16 
 
7 We are unable to estimate this number for programs serving more than 1,000 students because only one of the 
larger scale programs evaluated in our sample implemented the full bundle of recommended program characteristics. 
8 We observe the following virtual tutoring studies: Fesler et al. (2023), Gortazar et al. (2023), Kraft et al. (2022), 
Loeb et al. (2023), Roschelle et al. (2020), and Torgerson et al. (2016). We exclude Carlana and La Ferrara (2021) 
because their achievement outcome pools across math, Italian, and English. 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
32 
32 
to 0.21 SD (Table 5). However, results from our meta-analytic regressions presented in Table 8 
suggest these smaller effects are likely driven by other program features. Conditional on our 
extensive set of codes for observable program features, we estimate a positive but statistically 
insignificant coefficient when comparing virtual tutoring programs to those in person.  
Unfortunately, there are no studies to our knowledge that provide a direct causal 
comparison between virtual and in-person programs, which would be a major contribution to the 
field. Another limitation of the literature is that most studies of virtual tutoring in our sample 
were conducted in the post-COVID era, and some during the early part of the pandemic when 
challenges were most acute. These studies may not generalize well to non-pandemic times or to 
contexts that differ in important ways from those where leaders were willing to partner with 
researchers amid pandemic recovery. Two new studies of virtual tutoring released in 2024 find 
estimates that are similar to (Ready et al., 2024) or somewhat larger than (Carlana & La Ferrara, 
2024) the magnitude of our pooled estimates for virtual programs. We read this evidence as 
suggestive that online tutoring has the potential to be an effective approach to addressing scaling 
challenges when accompanied by other effective program design characteristics.  
Increasing Student-Tutor Ratios: The cost of tutoring is driven largely by tutor 
compensation. Many districts and tutoring organizations have chosen to increase student-tutor 
ratios as a means of expanding access while managing costs. In Table 11a, we report pooled 
effect estimates by student-tutor ratio and find somewhat larger impacts, on average, for 
programs with lower ratios. Using the full sample, we estimate pooled effects of 0.43, 0.41, 0.30, 
and 0.34 SD for 1:1, 2:1, 3:1, and 4:1 programs, respectively. The effects for programs with 5 or 
more students per tutor are substantially larger with the full sample (0.91 SD), but this result is 
not robust to excluding studies outside of our target of inference. The overall pattern of declining 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
33 
33 
effects persists when we focus on U.S. tutoring programs evaluated using standardized tests and 
when we further restrict to those studies for which we have more confidence in the quality of 
research methods. Importantly, even programs with ratios of 5 or more generate meaningful 
impacts, on average, between 0.24 SD and 0.29 SD. When we examine student-tutor ratios in a 
meta-regression framework, we find a pattern of larger effects for smaller student-tutor ratios, 
although none of the point estimates are statistically significant.  
Evidence from the ten studies that experimentally vary student-tutor ratios, summarized 
in Table 12a, provide a range of contrasts from 1:1 versus 2:1 ratios (Carlana & La Ferrara, 
2024; Loeb et al., 2023; Vadasy & Sanders, 2008) to 4:1 to 13:1 ratios (Vaughn et al., 2010). 
Most examine interventions with elementary students (Clarke et al., 2017, 2020, 2023; Doabler 
et al., 2019; Loeb et al., 2023; Schwartz et al., 2012; Vadasy & Sanders, 2008) except for three 
with middle schoolers (Carlana & La Ferrara, 2024; Kraft & Lovison, 2024; Vaughn et al., 
2010). The effect size differences most often favor smaller ratios but are not always large in 
magnitude and do not typically achieve statistical significance. However, many of these studies 
are underpowered to detect small differences in effects between treatment arms. In short, the 
existing research suggests that lower ratios produce larger effects, but it is possible to deliver 
tutoring in pairs or small groups and maintain meaningful effects.  
 
Using Peer Tutors: An alternative approach to scaling tutoring on a fixed budget is to 
enlist K-12 students as peer tutors. We find that pooled effect sizes for peer tutoring in our full 
sample are an impressive 0.36 SD, shown in Table 11b. Our meta-analytic regression (Table 8) 
suggests peer tutoring is equally as effective as tutoring by teachers, conditional on other 
program and study characteristics, with a non-significant difference of just 0.06 SD in favor of 
teachers relative to peer tutors. We know of only one study that randomizes students to different 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
34 
34 
tutor types. Mathes et al., (2003) uses a partially matched and partially randomized design to 
compare teachers who implemented small group (4-5:1) instruction verses overseeing pairs of 
students who used Peer Assisted Learning Strategies (PALS). They find effect sizes of 0.70 SD 
for teacher directed small-group instruction and 0.55 SD for peer-assisted instruction. We see the 
limited evidence for scaling with peer tutoring as encouraging but incomplete. 
 
Decreasing Dosage: A fourth common approach to scaling tutoring while controlling 
costs is to reduce overall dosage. Pooled effect estimates presented in Table 11b do not reveal a 
clear monotonic trend between dosage hours and program impacts, particularly in our more 
restricted samples. Across the full sample as well as the more restricted, generalizable samples, 
programs offering over 60 hours of tutoring consistently have the smallest impacts. In our 
preferred policy-relevant subsample, the greatest magnitude of effect is for programs providing 
15-29 hours of tutoring (0.41 SD). However, these pooled estimates may be inflated or deflated 
if other study characteristics are correlated with certain amounts of dosage. When employing 
meta-regression to control for a variety of program features and study characteristics, we do not 
find consistent statistically significant differences based on the total hours of dosage, as shown in 
Table 8. If anything, the pattern of results is counter-intuitive with programs offering higher 
dosage showing smaller effects. Here selection bias still poses a potential challenge if, for 
example, more intensive programs target particularly struggling students.  
Evidence from four studies that randomly assigned students to different doses of tutoring 
to isolate the causal impact of dosage suggests some benefits of greater dosage. As shown in 
Table 12b, three of these studies evaluate elementary school programs (Al Otaiba et al., 2005; 
Begeny, 2011; Wanzek & Vaughn, 2008) and one middle school program (Carlana & La Ferrara, 
2021). These studies provide a range of contrasts, for example, comparing four versus nine total 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
35 
35 
hours of tutoring (Begeny, 2011) to comparing 36 hours versus 72 hours (Al Otaiba et al., 2005). 
More often than not, these studies show greater effect sizes for programs providing higher than 
lower dosages. In short, studies that experimentally vary dosage suggest that decreasing dosage 
may attenuate effects. However, we still have much to learn about dosage effects related to days 
per week, hours per session, hours per week, total weeks, and whether the ideal design varies for 
different age groups, subjects, or by other factors.  
Discussion 
 
Evidence-based policymaking has increasingly become the standard in education, 
particularly as practitioners look to implement proven approaches to accelerate students’ 
academic growth after the substantial disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. While this 
trend is encouraging, it places increased importance on the external validity of research. Even 
well designed and implemented RCTs – the gold standard approach to causal inference – offer 
incomplete information to policymakers and practitioners if the evidence they produce is at 
arm’s length from the realities of implementing education policies and practice at scale. Meta-
analyses that pool evidence across multiple studies seemingly offer evidence with strong external 
validity, but aggregating across multiple studies with limited generalizability does not make the 
results valid for a very different target of inference.  
 
Our study illustrates the importance of carefully considering the alignment between the 
research evidence and the policy target of inference. We find that attempts to better harmonize 
our meta-analytic sample of 265 studies to the target of inference used by most policymakers – 
large-scale tutoring programs in the U.S. aiming to increase student performance on standardized 
tests – substantially reduces the pooled effect sizes we find. This attenuation is largely driven by 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
36 
36 
the declining impacts of tutoring programs as they scale – a pattern that is common across the 
education research literature.  
 
This pattern of declining effects at scale often leads to a circular argument that, “the 
program works when implemented with fidelity, it just wasn’t implemented correctly when taken 
to scale.” Alternatively, one might ask, “If implementation becomes systematically more difficult 
at scale, then does a program really work?” We see four possible responses to this challenge: 1) 
start small, learn, iterate, and engage in the hard but critical work to scale vertically (i.e. 
expanding program size) over time while maintaining program fidelity, 2) redesign the program 
to be easier to implement at scale, 3) adopt a more flexible approach to scaling that allows for 
localized adaptation, and/or 4) decide that a program is best delivered in a small-scale format and 
focus on horizontal scaling (replicating small programs). 
 
To be clear, we view the more target-equivalent estimates of the effects of tutoring we 
find as still meaningful and policy-relevant (Kraft, 2020). We continue to see tutoring as one of 
the most promising evidence-based approaches to accelerating student achievement. If districts 
could leverage tutoring at scale for those students whose learning was most negatively affected 
by the pandemic and produce effects similar to our policy-relevant estimates, it would be a huge 
success. In fact, several recent experimental studies of tutoring programs implemented post-
COVID at a medium scale (Carlana & La Ferrara, 2024; Cortes et al., 2024; Gortazar et al., 
2024) and at a large scale (Robinson et al., 2024) find effects on par with those from our target-
aligned pooled effect sizes.  
That said, we also think it is equally important for policymakers and practitioners alike to 
have more grounded expectations about what tutoring can accomplish. Several other recent 
studies using both experimental and quasi-experimental methods suggest early attempts to scale 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
37 
37 
tutoring in the U.S. have produced quite small effects (Carbonari, DeArmond, et al., 2024; 
Carbonari, Dewey, et al., 2024; Kraft et al., 2024; Ready et al., 2024). Outsized expectations can 
lead policymakers and practitioners to become disillusioned when they fail to realize the eye-
popping effect sizes of small-scale, boutique tutoring programs implemented under favorable 
circumstances among students who often opt into participating, particularly when meta-analytic 
estimates mask those contextual factors. Unrealistic expectations can also lead policymakers to 
mistakenly rely on a single or limited set of interventions when multiple interrelated programs 
may be needed to achieve their goals. Contextualizing tutoring program effects relative to their 
costs will also be critical for identifying sustainable models (Kohlmoos & Steinberg, 2024).   
 
New technology may also present opportunities to scale tutoring with greater fidelity 
while maintaining program effects and reducing per-pupil costs. Recent studies suggest that 
computer-assisted learning programs paired with tutoring (Bhatt et al., 2024) or integrated into 
core academic classes (Oreopoulos et al., 2024) can support effective instruction, potentially 
reducing common obstacles to scaling tutoring. There is growing interest in the potential of 
generative artificial intelligence to offer effective tutoring at scale, although early programs 
appear to fall well short of this goal (Barnum, 2024). We remain optimistic about the potential of 
these new technologies but emphasize that the benefits of human tutoring likely extend far 
beyond student performance on standardized tests, to say nothing about the value of tutoring for 
the tutor. Human tutoring offers the opportunity for authentic personal connections and social 
interactions that can contribute to student development; it also creates volunteer and employment 
opportunities and valuable experiences for those interested in pursuing a career in education.  
Conclusion 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
38 
38 
 
Efforts to integrate tutoring at scale into the U.S. K-12 public education system are at a 
critical juncture. New evidence documenting the mixed results of early efforts to expand access 
to tutoring during the 2021-22 and 2022-23 academic years is emerging right as large-scale 
federal funding to support tutoring is ending. With this paper, we aim to inform ongoing efforts 
to refine tutoring programs when implemented at scale and better calibrate expectations for what 
these programs are capable of accomplishing. Our findings highlight the importance of 
conducting research that considers both internal and external validity to best inform policy and 
practice. 
Our analyses suggest that a bundled package of program features hypothesized to 
promote effective tutoring does guard against some of the attenuation that occurs as programs 
expand. It remains an open question whether adapting individual features of this bundle – such as 
moving tutoring online, increasing student-tutor ratios, using peer tutors, or decreasing dosage – 
can be done without compromising effectiveness. Such changes may attenuate effects but still be 
an equally, if not more, cost-effective way to deliver tutoring at scale. Our hope is that as 
policymakers experiment with new tutoring models, they will partner with researchers to learn 
about the impacts of these adaptations. Continued efforts to integrate individualized instruction 
into the U.S. K-12 education system would benefit from a decades-long approach that focuses 
first on establishing effectiveness and then on scaling, rather than the other way around. 
 
 
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
39 
39 
References  
 
Accelerate. (2023). Beyond recovery: Funding high-impact tutoring for the long term. 
Accelerate. https://accelerate.us/beyond-recovery/ 
Al Otaiba, S., Schatschneider, C., & Silverman, E. (2005). Tutor-assisted intensive learning 
strategies in kindergarten: How much is enough? Exceptionality, 13(4), 195–208.  
Alexander, P. A. (2020). Methodological guidance paper: The art and science of quality                     
systematic reviews. Review of Educational Research, 90(1), 6–23.  
Angrist, J. D. (2004). American education research changes tack. Oxford Review of Economic 
Policy, 20(2), 198–212. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/grh011 
Banerjee, A. V., & Duflo, E. (2009). The experimental approach to development economics. 
Annual Review of Economics, 1(Volume 1, 2009), 151–178.  
Barnum, M. (2018). Why “personalized learning” advocates like Mark Zuckerberg keep citing a 
1984 study—And why it might not say much about schools today. Chalkbeat.  
Barnum, M. (2024). We tested an ai tutor for kids. It struggled with basic math. The Wall Street 
Journal.  
Barrios-Fernandez, A. (2023). Peer Effects in Education. In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of 
Economics and Finance.  
Begeny, J. C. (2011). Effects of the Helping Early Literacy with Practice Strategies (helps) 
reading fluency program when implemented at different frequencies. School Psychology 
Review, 40(1), 149–157. https://doi.org/10.1080/02796015.2011.12087734 
Bhatt, M., Guryan, J., Khan, S., LaForest, M., & Bhavya Mishra. (2024). Can technology 
facilitate scale? Evidence from a randomized evaluation of high dosage tutoring. NBER 
Working Paper, 32510. https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/UW8EH 
Borenstein, M., Higgins, J., Hedges, L., & Rothstein, H. (2017). Basics of meta‐analysis: I2 is 
not an absolute measure of heterogeneity. Research Synthesis Methods, 8(1), 5–18.  
Boveda, M., Ford, K. S., Frankenberg, E., & López, F. (2023). Editorial vision 2022–2025. 
Review of Educational Research, 93(5), 635–640.  
Brodeur, A., Cook, N., & Heyes, A. (2020). Methods matter: P-hacking and publication bias in 
causal analysis in economics. The American Economic Review, 110(11), 3634–3660. 
Callen, I., Goldhaber, D., Kane, T. J., McDonald, A., McEachin, A., & Morton, E. (2024). 
Pandemic learning loss by student baseline achievement: Extent and sources of 
heterogeneity (292–0224; CALDER Working Paper). American Institutes for Research.  
Carbonari, M. V., DeArmond, M., Dewey, D., Dizon-Ross, E., & Goldhaber, D. (2024). Impacts 
of academic recovery interventions on student achievement in 2022-23 (303–0724; 
CALDER Working Paper). American Institutes for Research.  
Carbonari, M. V., Dewey, D., Kane, T. J., Muroga, A., DeArmond, M., Dizon-Ross, E., 
Goldhaber, D., Morton, E., Davison, M., & Hashim, A. K. (2024). The impact and 
implementation of academic interventions during Covid: Evidence from the road to 
recovery project (CALDER Working Paper). American Institutes for Research.  
Carlana, M., & La Ferrara, E. (2021). Apart but connected: Online tutoring and student 
outcomes during the COVID-19 pandemic (21–350; EdWorkingPaper).  
Carlana, M., & La Ferrara, E. (2024). Apart but connected: Online tutoring, cognitive outcomes, 
and soft skills (Working Paper 32272). National Bureau of Economic Research.  
Cheung, A. C. K., & Slavin, R. E. (2016). How methodological features affect effect sizes in 
education. Educational Researcher, 45(5), 283–292.  

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
40 
40 
Clarke, B., Doabler, C. T., Kosty, D., Kurtz Nelson, E., Smolkowski, K., Fien, H., & Turtura, J. 
(2017). Testing the efficacy of a kindergarten mathematics intervention by small group 
size. AERA Open, 3(2), 233285841770689. https://doi.org/10.1177/2332858417706899 
Clarke, B., Doabler, C. T., Sutherland, M., Kosty, D., Turtura, J., & Smolkowski, K. (2023). 
Examining the impact of a first grade whole number intervention by group size. Journal 
of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 16(2), 326–349.  
Clarke, B., Doabler, C. T., Turtura, J., Smolkowski, K., Kosty, D. B., Sutherland, M., Kurtz-
Nelson, E., Fien, H., & Baker, S. K. (2020). Examining the efficacy of a kindergarten 
mathematics intervention by group size and initial skill: Implications for practice and 
policy. The Elementary School Journal, 121(1), 125–153. https://doi.org/10.1086/710041 
Cohen, L. (2024). Learning curve: Lessons from the tutoring revolution in public education. 
FutureEd & the National Student Support Accelerator. 
Cortes, K., Kortecamp, K., Loeb, S., & Robinson, C. (2024). A scalable approach to high-impact 
tutoring for young readers: Results of a randomized controlled trial (Working Paper 
32039). National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w32039 
Dahabreh, I. J., Petito, L. C., Robertson, S. E., Hernán, M. A., & Steingrimsson, J. A. (2020). 
Toward causally interpretable meta-analysis: Transporting inferences from multiple 
randomized trials to a new target population. Epidemiology, 31(3), 334.  
Davis, J. M. V., Guryan, J., Hallberg, K., & Ludwig, J. (2017). The economics of scale-up 
(w23925). National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w23925 
Deke, J., Dragoset, L., Bogen, K., & Gill, B. (2012). Impacts of Title I Supplemental Educational 
Services on student achievement (2012–4053). National Center for Education Evaluation 
and Regional Assistance. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED532016 
Dietrichson, J., Bøg, M., Filges, T., & Klint Jørgensen, A.-M. (2017). Academic interventions 
for elementary and middle school students with low socioeconomic status: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 87(2), 243–282.  
DiMarco, B., & Jordan, P. W. (2022, February 24). What will $50b in COVID school relief 
funding buy? The74Million.  
Doabler, C. T., Clarke, B., Kosty, D., Kurtz-Nelson, E., Fien, H., Smolkowski, K., & Baker, S. 
K. (2019). Examining the impact of group size on the treatment intensity of a tier 2 
mathematics intervention within a systematic framework of replication. Journal of 
Learning Disabilities, 52(2), 168–180. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022219418789376 
Duval, S., & Tweedie, R. (2000). A nonparametric “trim and fill” method of accounting for 
publication bias in meta-analysis. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 
95(449), 89–98. https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.2000.10473905 
Esterling, K., Brady, D., & Schwitzgebel, E. (2024). The necessity of construct and external 
validity for deductive causal inference. https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/2s8w5 
Fesler, L., Gu, A., & Chojnacki, G. (2023). Air tutors’ online tutoring: Math knowledge impacts 
and participant math perceptions. Mathematica. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED628638 
Fitzgerald, K. G., & Tipton, E. (2024). Using extant data to improve estimation of the 
standardized mean difference. Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics. 
Fryer, R. G. (2017). The production of human capital in developed countries: Evidence from 196 
randomized field experimentsa. In A. V. Banerjee & E. Duflo (Eds.), Handbook of 
Economic Field Experiments (Vol. 2, pp. 95–322). North-Holland.  
Fryer, R. G., & Howard-Noveck, M. (2020). High-Dosage Tutoring and Reading Achievement: 
Evidence from New York City. Journal of Labor Economics, 38(2), 421–452.  

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
41 
41 
Goldhaber, D., Kane, T. J., McEachin, A., & Morton, E. (2022, November 16). Opinion | To help 
students shoot for the moon, we must think bigger and bolder. Washington Post.  
Goldhaber, D. & Falken, G. (2024). ESSER and student achievement: Assessing the impacts of  
the largest one-time federal investment in K12 schools. CALDER Working Paper No. 
301-0624.  
Gortazar, L., Hupkau, C., & Roldán-Monés, A. (2024). Online tutoring works: Experimental 
evidence from a program with vulnerable children. Journal of Public Economics, 232. 
Gortazar, Lucas, Hupkau, Claudia, & Roldan, Antonio. (2023). Online tutoring works: 
Experimental evidence from a program with vulnerable children (EdWorkingPaper 23–
743). Annenberg Institute for School Reform at Brown University.  
Hedberg, E. C. (2014). ROBUMETA: Stata module to perform robust variance estimation in 
meta-regression with dependent effect size estimates [Stata]. Boston College Department 
of Economics. https://ideas.repec.org//c/boc/bocode/s457219.html 
Hedges, L. V. (2007). Effect sizes in cluster-randomized designs. Journal of Educational and 
Behavioral Statistics, 32(4), 341–370. https://doi.org/10.3102/1076998606298043 
Hedges, L., Tipton, E., & Johnson, M. C. (2010). Robust variance estimation in meta-regression 
with dependent effect size estimates. Research Synthesis Methods, 1(1), 39–65.  
Heinrich, C. J., Burch, P., Good, A., Acosta, R., Cheng, H., Dillender, M., Kirshbaum, C., Nisar, 
H., & Stewart, M. (2014). Improving the implementation and effectiveness of out-of-
school-time tutoring. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33(2), 471–494.  
Heinrich, C. J., Meyer, R. H., & Whitten, G. (2010). Supplemental education services under No 
Child Left Behind: Who signs up, and what do they gain? Educational Evaluation and 
Policy Analysis, 32(2), 273–298. https://doi.org/10.3102/0162373710361640 
Hill, C. J., Bloom, H. S., Black, A. R., & Lipsey, M. W. (2008). Empirical Benchmarks for 
Interpreting Effect Sizes in Research. Child Development Perspectives, 2(3), 172–177.  
Inns, A. J., Lake, C., Pellegrini, M., & Slavin, R. (2019). A quantitative synthesis of research on 
programs for struggling readers in elementary schools (Best Evidence Encylopedia). 
Center for Research and Reform in Education. 
James-Burdumy, S., Dynarski, M., Moore, M., Deke, J., Mansfield, W., Pistorino, C., & Warner, 
E. (2005). When schools stay open late: The national evaluation of the 21st Century 
Community Learning Centers program. Final report. U.S. Department of Education.  
Kohlmoos, L., & Steinberg, M. P. (2024). Contextualizing the impact of tutoring on student 
learning: Efficiency, cost effectiveness, and the known unknowns. Accelerate.  
Kraft, M. A. (2015). How to Make Additional Time Matter: Integrating Individualized Tutorials 
into an Extended Day. Education Finance and Policy, 10(1), 81–116.  
Kraft, M. A. (2020). Interpreting effect sizes of education interventions. Educational Researcher, 
49(4), 241–253. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X20912798 
Kraft, M. A. (2023). The effect-size benchmark that matters most: Education interventions often 
fail. Educational Researcher, 52(3), 183–187.  
Kraft, M. A., Edwards, D. S., & Cannata, M. (2024). Scaling tutoring in a large urban school 
district: Program dynamics and causal effects. NBER Working Paper. 
Kraft, M. A., & Falken, G. T. (2021). A blueprint for scaling tutoring and mentoring across 
public schools. AERA Open, 7, 233285842110428.  
Kraft, M. A., List, J. A., Livingston, J. A., & Sadoff, S. (2022). Online tutoring by college 
volunteers: Experimental evidence from a pilot program. AEA Papers and Proceedings, 
112, 614–618. https://doi.org/10.1257/pandp.20221038 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
42 
42 
Kraft, M. A., & Lovison, V. S. (2024). The effect of student-tutor ratios: Experimental evidence 
from a pilot online math tutoring program. In EdWorkingPapers.com (EdWorkingPaper). 
Annenberg Institute at Brown University. https://edworkingpapers.com/ai24-976 
Littell, J. H. (2024). The logic of generalization from systematic reviews and meta-analyses of 
impact evaluations. Evaluation Review, 48(3), 427–460.  
Loeb, S., Novicoff, S., Pollard, C., Robinson, C., & White, S. (2023). The effects of virtual 
tutoring on young readers: Results from a randomized controlled trial. National Student 
Support Accelerator. 
Makori, A., Burch, P., & Loeb, S. (2024). Scaling high-impact tutoring: School level 
perspectives on implementation challenges and strategies (24–923; EdWorkingPaper).  
Mathes, P. G., Torgesen, J. K., Clancy-Menchetti, J., Santi, K., Nicholas, K., Robinson, C., & 
Grek, M. (2003). A comparison of teacher-directed versus peer-assisted instruction to 
struggling first-grade readers. The Elementary School Journal, 103(5), 459–479.  
McShane, B. B., Böckenholt, U., & Hansen, K. T. (2016). Adjusting for publication bias in meta-
analysis: An evaluation of selection methods and some cautionary notes. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 11(5), 730–749. https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691616662243 
Moore, E., Morton, C., Schwendel, G., & Welbourne, S. (2024). National Tutoring Programme 
year 3: Impact report. Department for Education, Government Social Research.  
National Center for Education Statistics. (2024). School Pulse Panel: Responses to the pandemic 
and efforts toward recovery. U.S. Dept. of Education, Institute of Education Sciences.  
National Student Support Accelerator. (2023). A snapshot of state tutoring policies. 
https://studentsupportaccelerator.org/briefs/snapshot-state-tutoring-policies 
Nickow, A., Oreopoulos, P., & Quan, V. (2020). The impressive effects of tutoring on prek-12 
learning: A systematic review and meta-analysis of the experimental evidence (Working 
Paper 27476). National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27476 
Nickow, A., Oreopoulos, P., & Quan, V. (2024). The promise of tutoring for prek–12 learning: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis of the experimental evidence. American Educational 
Research Journal, 61(1), 74–107. https://doi.org/10.3102/00028312231208687 
Oreopoulos, P., Gibbs, C., Jensen, M., & Price, J. (2024). Teaching teachers to use computer 
assisted learning effectively: Experimental and quasi-experimental evidence. NBER 
Working Paper, 32388. 
Pellegrini, M., Lake, C., Neitzel, A., & Slavin, R. E. (2021). Effective programs in elementary 
mathematics: A meta-analysis. AERA Open, 7, 2332858420986211.  
Pigott, T. D., & Polanin, J. R. (2020). Methodological guidance paper: High-quality meta-
analysis in a systematic review. Review of Educational Research, 90(1), 24–46.  
Polanin, J., Zhang, Q., Taylor, J., Williams, R., Joshi, M., & Burr, L. (2023). Evidence gap maps 
in education research. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 16(3), 532–552.  
Pritchett, L., & Sandefur, J. (2015). Learning from experiments when context matters. American 
Economic Review, 105(5), 471–475. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.p20151016 
Ready, D. D., McCormick, S. G., & Shmoys, R. J. (2024). The effects of in-school virtual 
tutoring on student reading development: Evidence from a short-cycle randomized 
controlled trial (24–942; EdWorkingPaper). Annenberg Institute at Brown University.  
Robinson, C. D., Bisht, B., & Loeb, S. (2022). The inequity of opt-in educational resources and 
an intervention to increase equitable access. Annenberg EdWorkingPaper, 22–654.  
Robinson, C. D., Kraft, M. A., Loeb, S., & Schueler, B. E. (2021). Accelerating student learning 
with high-dosage tutoring. EdResearch for Recovery Project.  

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
43 
43 
Robinson, C. D., Pollard, C., Novicoff, S., White, S., & Loeb, S. (2024). The effects of virtual 
tutoring on young readers: Results from a randomized controlled trial. EdWorkingPapers 
No. 24-955.  
Roschelle, J., Cheng, B. H., Hodkowski, N., Neisler, J., & Haldar, L. (2020). Evaluation of an 
online tutoring program in elementary mathematics. Digital Promise.  
Ross, S., Potter, A., Paek, J., McKay, D., Sanders, W., & Ashton, J. (2008). Implementation and 
outcomes of Supplemental Educational Services: The Tennessee state-wide evaluation 
study. Journal of Education for Students Placed at Risk (JESPAR), 13(1), 26–58.  
Schwartz, R. M., Schmitt, M. C., & Lose, M. K. (2012). Effects of teacher-student ratio in 
response to intervention approaches. Elementary School Journal, 112(4), 547–567.  
Slough, T., & Tyson, S. A. (2023). External validity and meta-analysis. American Journal of 
Political Science, 67(2), 440–455. https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12742 
Springer, M. G., Pepper, M. J., & Ghosh-Dastidar, B. (2014). Supplemental Educational Services 
and student test score gains: Evidence from a large, urban school district. Journal of 
Education Finance, 39(4), 370–403. 
Tanner-Smith, E. E., & Tipton, E. (2014). Robust variance estimation with dependent effect 
sizes. Research Synthesis Methods, 5(1), 13–30. https://doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.1091 
Tipton, E., Bryan, C., Murray, J., McDaniel, M. A., Schneider, B., & Yeager, D. S. (2023). Why 
meta-analyses of growth mindset and other interventions should follow best practices for 
examining heterogeneity: Commentary on Macnamara and Burgoyne (2023) and 
Burnette et al. (2023). Psychological Bulletin, 149(3–4), 229–241.  
Tipton, E., & Olsen, R. B. (2018). A review of statistical methods for generalizing from 
evaluations of educational interventions. Educational Researcher, 47(8), 516–524.  
Torgerson, C., Ainsworth, H., Buckley, H., Hampden-Thompson, G., Hewitt, C., Humphry, D., 
Jefferson, L., Mitchell, N., & Torgerson, D. (2016). Affordable online maths tuition: 
Evaluation report and executive summary. Education Endowment Foundation.  
Tyack, D. B. (1974). The one best system: A history of American urban education. Harvard 
University Press. 
Vadasy, P. F., & Sanders, E. A. (2008). Code-oriented instruction for kindergarten students at 
risk for reading difficulties. Reading and Writing, 21(9), 929–963.  
Vaughn, S., Wanzek, J., Wexler, J., Barth, A., Cirino, P. T., Fletcher, J., Romain, M., Denton, C. 
A., Roberts, G., & Francis, D. (2010). The relative effects of group size on reading 
progress of older students with reading difficulties. Reading and Writing, 23(8), 931–956.  
Victorian Auditor-General’s Office. (2024). Effectiveness of the Tutor Learning Initiative 
Independent assurance report to Parliament.  
von Hippel, P. T. (2024, March 7). Two-sigma tutoring: Separating science fiction from science 
fact. Education Next.  
Wanzek, J., & Vaughn, S. (2008). Response to varying amounts of time in reading intervention 
for students with low response to intervention. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 41(2), 
126–142. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022219407313426 
Zimmer, R., Gill, B., Razquin, P., Booker, K., & Lockwood, J. R. (2009). State and local 
implementation of the No Child Left Behind Act, Volume VII--Title I school choice and 
Supplemental Educational Services: Final report. U.S. Department of Education Office 
of Planning, Evaluation and Policy Development. 
Zimmer, R., Hamilton, L., & Christina, R. (2010). After-school tutoring in the context of no 
Child Left Behind. Economics of Education Review, 29(1), 18–28.  

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
44 
44 
Figures and Tables 
Figure 1. Evidence gap map by school level and subject area 
 
Notes: Each circle is scaled to illustrate the number of unique studies with estimates in that cross section of features. The color of each 
circle presents the average pooled effect size amongst those estimates. Circles are all labeled with the number of studies they 
represent. Note that for this figure we have established mutually exclusive categories for school level, where we round up to the higher 
school level observed if studies treat students are more than one level. 
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
45 
45 
Figure 2. Evidence gap map by tutored student sample size and subject area 
 
Notes: Each circle is scaled to illustrate the number of unique studies with estimates in that cross section of features. The color of each 
circle presents the average pooled effect size amongst those estimates. Circles are all labeled with the number of studies they 
represent. 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
46 
46 
 
 
Figure 3. Pooled estimated impacts of tutoring across program size and study characteristics 
 
Notes. Each point represents a pooled effect size estimate for the subsample of studies 
triangulated by the tutored student sample size and restrictions indicated; bars represent 95% 
confidence intervals for these estimates. All estimates for studies with tutored student samples at 
or above 1,000 students are not statistically distinguishable from zero. All estimates pool impacts 
across math and reading. 
 
  
 
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
Pooled effect size estimate
0-99
100-399
400-999
≥1,000
Tutored student sample size, binned
Full sample
Standardized tests, USA settings
Std tests, USA settings, no outliers, published >2009

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
47 
47 
Figure 4. Funnel plots displaying trim and fill results at the study-level 
 
Notes: Each panel presents the average effects of each study-by-subject in the sample indicated. 
Panel A presents results for all studies and subjects, Panel B limits to studies of programs 
treating fewer than 100 students, and Panel C limits to studies of programs treating at least 100 
students. 
 
 
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
Standard error
-1
0
1
2
3
Effect size
Panel A. Full sample
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
Standard error
-1
0
1
2
3
Effect size
Panel B. 0-99 Tutored students
0
.2
.4
.6
Standard error
-1
0
1
2
3
Effect size
Panel C. ≥100 Tutored students
Pseudo 95% CI
Studies
Estimated θREML

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
48 
48 
Figure 5. Density of effect estimate p-values across significance thresholds 
 
Notes: Each panel presents a histogram of estimated effects’ p-values, constrained to those <0.15, stacked 
across math and reading. Mass points to the left of each vertical, dashed line would suggest manipulation 
of results to attain significance or asymmetric reporting of results according to their significance. Panel A 
shows this distribution for the full sample of p-values below 0.15, Panels B and C disaggregate estimates 
according to the study’s treated student sample size. 
0
100
200
300
400
500
Frequency
0
.05
.1
.15
p-value
Panel A. Full sample of studies
0
100
200
300
Frequency
0
.05
.1
.15
p-value
Panel B. 0-99 tutored student subsample
0
50
100
150
200
Frequency
0
.05
.1
.15
p-value
Panel C. ≥100 tutored student subsample

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
49 
49 
Figure 6. Gaps between pooled estimates for all studies compared to those using a bundle of 
tutoring best practices 
 
Notes: Each point represents a pooled effect size estimate for the subsample of studies 
triangulated by the tutored student sample size and sample restrictions indicated. Dashed lines 
demarcate the difference between estimates using the full sample of studies indicated (solid 
markers) and estimates for the subsample of studies in this same group which leverage a bundle 
of best practices identified in the tutoring literature (hollow markers). Tutoring programs in the 
bundle subgroups share the following characteristics: in-person instruction, instruction at school, 
instruction during school, no greater than three-to-one student-to-tutor ratio, curriculum provided 
to tutors, at least 3 sessions per week, and at least 15 hours of total instruction dosage planned. 
All estimates pool across math and reading. 
 
 
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
Pooled effect size estimate
0-99
100-399
400-999
≥1,000
Tutored student sample size, binned
Full sample
Std tests, USA settings
Std tests, USA, no outliers, ≥2010
Bundle x full sample
Bundle x std tests, USA
Bundle x std tests, USA, no outliers, ≥2010

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
50 
50 
 
Table 1: Study characteristics 
  
  
Sample mean (%) 
n 
Publication date  
 
 
 Published before 1980 
3.77 
10 
 Published in the 1980s 
1.89 
5 
 Published in the 1990s 
7.92 
21 
 Published in the 2000s 
24.15 
64 
 Published in the 2010s 
50.57 
134 
 Published in the 2020s 
11.7 
31 
Publication type 
 
  
 Peer-reviewed journal article 
76.98 
204 
 Research firm report 
8.3 
22 
 University-based research center report 
1.89 
5 
 Working paper 
1.51 
4 
 Dissertation 
8.3 
22 
 Other publication type 
3.02 
8 
*Setting grade level 
 
  
 Lower elementary (K-2) 
62.64 
166 
 Upper elementary (3-5) 
41.89 
111 
 Middle (6-8) 
12.45 
33 
 High (9-12) 
3.4 
9 
Setting urbanicity 
 
  
 Urban setting 
39.62 
105 
 Suburban setting 
4.91 
13 
 Rural setting 
4.91 
13 
 Multiple urbanicities studied 
18.49 
49 
 Urbanicity unknown 
32.08 
85 
Setting country 
 
  
 USA 
80.75 
214 
 International / OECD Country 
19.25 
51 
Treated student sample 
 
  
 0-99 treated sample 
59.25 
157 
 100-399 treated sample 
29.81 
79 
 400-999 treated sample 
7.55 
20 
 ≥1000 treated sample 
3.4 
9 
Tutoring subject 
 
  
 English as a second language 
1.89 
5 
 Math 
27.55 
73 
 Reading 
64.53 
171 
 Multiple subjects 
6.04 
16 
N studies 
265 
 
* Setting grade level categories are not mutually exclusive 
 
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
51 
51 
 
Table 2: Intervention characteristics 
  
  
Sample mean (SD) 
n 
Virtual / in-person delivery 
 
 
 
Tutoring online 
3.24 
11 
 
Tutoring in-person 
96.76 
329 
Where tutoring happens 
 
  
 
Tutoring at school 
85.59 
291 
 
Tutoring at home 
1.18 
4 
 
Tutoring in multiple locations / other 
2.65 
9 
 
Tutoring location unknown 
10.59 
36 
When tutoring happens 
 
  
 
Tutoring during school 
76.18 
259 
 
Tutoring after school 
6.47 
22 
 
Tutoring during vacation 
0.29 
1 
 
Multiple time windows / other 
4.41 
15 
 
Timing unknown 
12.65 
43 
Student-tutor ratio 
 
  
 
1:1 student-tutor ratio 
45.88 
156 
 
2:1 student-tutor ratio 
16.18 
55 
 
3:1 student-tutor ratio 
13.24 
45 
 
4:1 student-tutor ratio 
14.12 
48 
 
≥5:1 student-tutor ratio 
7.94 
27 
 
Ratio unknown 
2.65 
9 
Tutor type 
 
  
 
Tutored by teacher 
17.65 
60 
 
Tutored by paraprofessional 
17.06 
58 
 
Tutored by peer 
9.41 
32 
 
Tutored by college / graduate student 
16.18 
55 
 
Other tutor type 
12.06 
41 
 
Tutor type unknown 
27.65 
94 
*Dosage (units specified) 
 
  
 
Sessions per week 
3.39 (1.29) 
  
 
Hours per session 
0.61 (0.38) 
  
 
Hours per week 
2.01 (1.54) 
  
 
Weeks per year 
16.32 (9.15) 
  
 
Hours total dosage 
33.51 (31.60) 
  
Curriculum provided 
 
  
 
Yes 
89.12 
303 
 
No 
10.59 
36 
 
Unknown 
0.29 
1 
N interventions 
360 
 
* Dosage metrics are not binary variables and are not mutually exclusive. Standard 
deviations are reported in parentheses, where applicable. All other sets of variables are 
percents. 
 
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
52 
52 
 
 
Table 3. Estimates pooled by grade level and tested subject 
  
Lower 
elementary 
Upper 
elementary 
Middle 
school 
High 
school 
Pooled 
grades 
  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
Math 
0.333*** 
0.441*** 
0.377*** 
0.550* 
0.385*** 
  
(0.036) 
(0.053) 
(0.075) 
(0.326) 
(0.032) 
  
[0.045, 
0.620] 
[0.150, 
0.732] 
[-0.154, 
0.907] 
[-0.543, 
0.751] 
[0.018, 
0.0751] 
  
229 
268 
46 
13 
507 
Reading 
0.462*** 
0.480*** 
0.362*** 
0.158 
0.436*** 
  
(0.057) 
(0.103) 
(0.111) 
(0.131) 
(0.046) 
  
[-0.392, 
1.317] 
[-0.426, 
1.386] 
[-0.245, 
0.970] 
[-0.313, 
0.629] 
[-0.319, 
1.192] 
  
1,263 
608 
127 
27 
1,716 
Pooled 
subjects 
0.438*** 
0.469*** 
0.360*** 
0.269** 
0.423*** 
(0.047) 
(0.075) 
(0.076) 
(0.135) 
(0.036) 
  
[-0.367, 
1.243] 
[-0.435, 
1.373] 
[-0.188, 
0.908] 
[-0.115, 
0.652] 
[-0.314, 
1.161] 
  
1,492 
876 
173 
40 
2,223 
Notes: *** p<0.10; ** p<0.05, * p<0.01. Prediction intervals are included for each 
estimate in brackets; robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Estimates 
may be included in more than one group if they treat students in multiple grade 
levels. Lower elementary indicates treatment in grades K-2; upper elementary 
indicates treatment in grades 3-5; middle school indicates grades 6-8; high school 
indicates grades 9-12. Pooled estimates combine impact estimates for both math and 
reading subject tests.  
 
 
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
53 
53 
 
Table 4. Estimates by RCT quality concerns, stacked subjects 
Lower 
elementary 
Upper 
elementary 
Middle school 
High school 
Pooled grades 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
Panel A. Studies with no RCT quality concerns 
0.437*** 
0.465*** 
0.259*** 
0.184** 
0.415*** 
(0.054) 
(0.081) 
(0.046) 
(0.090) 
(0.040) 
1,225 
807 
146 
36 
1,875 
Panel B. Studies with an RCT quality concern 
0.436*** 
0.505*** 
1.019** 
  
0.461*** 
(0.085) 
(0.073) 
(0.464) 
  
(0.073) 
267 
69 
27 
  
348 
Panel C. Omitting top and bottom 2.5% of effect size observations 
0.384*** 
0.376*** 
0.293*** 
0.287** 
0.379*** 
(0.027) 
(0.030) 
(0.044) 
(0.143) 
(0.021) 
1,430 
815 
164 
39 
2,113 
Panel D. Studies published prior to 2000 
0.473*** 
0.315*** 
0.557*** 
1.198 
0.449*** 
(0.104) 
(0.115) 
(0.189) 
(0.779) 
(0.083) 
191 
67 
22 
5 
259 
Panel E. Studies published between 2000 and 2009 
0.573*** 
0.727*** 
0.956** 
  
0.584*** 
(0.125) 
(0.233) 
(0.407) 
  
(0.103) 
503 
252 
37 
  
654 
Panel F. Studies published between 2010 and 2019 
0.383*** 
0.375*** 
0.223*** 
0.178 
0.376*** 
(0.034) 
(0.046) 
(0.033) 
(0.122) 
(0.033) 
681 
489 
96 
30 
1,118 
Panel G. Studies published in 2020 and following 
0.233* 
0.376*** 
0.189** 
0.116*** 
0.272*** 
(0.125) 
(0.091) 
(0.079) 
(0.004) 
(0.085) 
117 
68 
18 
5 
192 
Notes: *** p<0.10; ** p<0.05, * p<0.01. Estimates may be included in more than one group if they 
treat students in multiple grade levels. All cells pool across both math and reading. Cells left blank 
contain too few or no estimates. Panel A and B split up the entire sample by whether we identified 
any concerns with the quality of the RCT. Panel C omits the top and bottom 2.5% of observations by 
effect size magnitude. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
54 
54 
Table 5. Pooled effect size estimates overall and by treated student sample size 
No sample size 
restriction 
0-99 treated 
students 
100-399 treated 
students 
400-999 treated 
students 
≥1,000 treated 
students 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
Panel A. Full analytic sample with no restrictions 
0.423*** 
0.545*** 
0.315*** 
0.253*** 
0.138 
(0.036) 
(0.060) 
(0.026) 
(0.037) 
(0.103) 
[-0.314, 1.161] 
[-0.689, 1.780] 
[-0.103, 0.733] 
[0.095, 0.411] 
[-0.362, 0.638] 
2,223 
1,403 
640 
112 
68 
Panel B. Standardized tests only 
0.352*** 
0.459*** 
0.279*** 
0.219*** 
0.138 
(0.028) 
(0.048) 
(0.024) 
(0.034) 
(0.106) 
[-0.228, 0.932] 
[-0.359, 1.277] 
[-0.148, 0.706] 
[0.061, 0.377] 
[-0.365, 0.642] 
1,810 
1,086 
560 
97 
67 
Panel C. USA settings only 
0.390*** 
0.463*** 
0.340*** 
0.254*** 
0.154 
(0.027) 
(0.041) 
(0.027) 
(0.041) 
(0.148) 
[-0.228. 0.932] 
[-0.348, 1.275] 
[-0.030, 0.709] 
[0.071, 0.437] 
[-0.463, 0.771] 
1,829 
1,152 
528 
90 
59 
Panel D. Standardized tests only, USA settings only 
0.351*** 
0.438*** 
0.297*** 
0.214*** 
0.155 
(0.029) 
(0.049) 
(0.024) 
(0.037) 
(0.154) 
[-0.245, 0.947] 
[-0.347, 1.222] 
[-0.066. 0.660] 
[0.055, 0.373] 
[-0.468, 0.778] 
1,484 
895 
456 
75 
58 
Panel E. Omitting the top and bottom 2.5% of effect sizes 
0.379*** 
0.464*** 
0.307*** 
0.253*** 
0.138 
(0.021) 
(0.028) 
(0.025) 
(0.037) 
(0.103) 
[-0.193, 0.951] 
[-0.044, 0.973] 
[-0.078, 0.692] 
[0.095, 0.411] 
[-0.362, 0.638] 
2,113 
1,306 
627 
112 
68 
Panel F. Studies published in or since 2010 
0.357*** 
0.433*** 
0.328*** 
0.289*** 
0.138 
(0.031) 
(0.053) 
(0.035) 
(0.039) 
(0.103) 
[-0.263, 0.976] 
[-0.337, 1.204] 
[-0.169, 0.825] 
[0.202, 0.375] 
[-0.362, 0.638] 
1,310 
725 
430 
87 
68 
Panel G. Standardized tests only, USA settings only, omitting the top and bottom 2.5% of 
effect sizes, studies published in or since 2010 
0.320*** 
0.379*** 
0.305*** 
0.245*** 
0.155 
(0.030) 
(0.034) 
(0.034) 
(0.045) 
(0.154) 
[-0.054, 0.694] 
[0.058, 0.701] 
[-0.054, 0.663] 
[0.095, 0.394] 
[-0.468, 0.778] 
840 
462 
268 
52 
58 
Notes: *** p<0.10; ** p<0.05, * p<0.01. Prediction intervals are included for each estimate in 
brackets; robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Each cell presents the Hedges’ g 
estimate stacking both math and reading. Model (1) offers the pooled average impact of tutoring 
across the entire subsample indicated in each panel. Models (2) through (5) disaggregate the 
estimate in Model (1) by the tutored student sample size of each study. Panel D combines the 
sample restrictions in Panels B and C; Panel G combines the sample restrictions in Panels D, E, 
and F. 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
55 
55 
  
 
 
 
 
Table 6. Tests for significant differences in estimate mass across p-value thresholds 
  
p-value threshold = 0.10 
  
p-value threshold = 0.05 
Bandwidth  
± 0.02 
± 0.01 
± 0.005 
  
± 0.02 
± 0.01 
± 0.005 
Panel A. Full sample 
N estimates within bandwidth 
117 
54 
32 
  
180 
91 
47 
% significant estimates  
0.52 
0.50 
0.41 
  
0.56 
0.48 
0.45 
One-sided p-value 
0.36 
0.55 
0.89 
  
0.06 
0.66 
0.81 
Panel B. Studies with 0-99 treated students 
N estimates within bandwidth 
85 
42 
25 
  
123 
64 
35 
% significant estimates 
0.52 
0.50 
0.44 
  
0.53 
0.42 
0.43 
One-sided p-value 
0.41 
0.56 
0.79 
  
0.29 
0.92 
0.84 
Panel C. Studies with 100+ treated students 
N estimates within bandwidth 
32 
12 
7 
  
57 
27 
12 
% significant estimates  
0.53 
0.50 
0.29 
  
0.63 
0.63 
0.50 
One-sided p-value 
0.43 
0.61 
0.94 
  
0.03 
0.12 
0.61 
Notes: Here we present the likelihood of observing the number of significant p-values in our data at the 
5% and 10% significance levels within the bandwidths 0.02, 0.01, and 0.005 around those thresholds. For 
each of these combinations, we isolate the subsample within the indicated bandwidth around the 
indicated threshold (“N estimates within bandwidth”), present the share of significant estimate p-values 
in that range (“Share significant estimates”), calculate the likelihood of having at least that many 
significant estimates assuming a binomial distribution (“One-sided p-value”). We repeat this exercise for 
our full sample of estimates in Panel A, and disaggregated according to treated student sample size in 
Panels B and C. All estimates pool across both math and reading subject areas. All cells pool across math 
and reading. 
  
 
 
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
56 
56 
Table 7. Intervention characteristics across treated student sample size 
    
Treated student sample size 
    
0 to 99 
100 to 399 
400 to 999 
≥1,000 
Virtual / in-person delivery 
 
 
 
 
 
Tutoring online 
0.52 
6.31 
0.00 
23.08 
 
Tutoring in-person 
99.48 
93.69 
100.00 
76.92 
Where tutoring happens 
 
  
  
  
 
Tutoring at school 
86.01 
81.08 
95.65 
100.00 
 
Tutoring at home 
0.52 
2.70 
0.00 
0.00 
 
Tutoring in multiple locations / other 
2.59 
3.60 
0.00 
0.00 
 
Tutoring location unknown 
10.88 
12.61 
4.35 
0.00 
When tutoring happens 
 
  
  
  
 
Tutoring during school 
76.68 
72.07 
86.96 
84.62 
 
Tutoring after school 
6.22 
9.01 
0.00 
0.00 
 
Tutoring during vacation 
0.52 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
 
Multiple time windows / other 
3.11 
6.31 
8.70 
0.00 
 
Timing unknown 
13.47 
12.61 
4.35 
15.38 
Student-tutor ratio 
 
  
  
  
 
1:1 student-tutor ratio 
49.22 
42.34 
39.13 
38.46 
 
2:1 student-tutor ratio 
11.92 
21.62 
13.04 
38.46 
 
3:1 student-tutor ratio 
12.44 
15.32 
17.39 
0.00 
 
4:1 student-tutor ratio 
13.99 
16.22 
13.04 
0.00 
 
≥5:1 student-tutor ratio 
9.84 
2.70 
8.70 
23.08 
 
Ratio unknown 
2.59 
1.80 
8.70 
0.00 
Tutor type 
 
  
  
  
 
Tutored by teacher 
15.03 
19.82 
21.74 
30.77 
 
Tutored by paraprofessional 
15.03 
18.02 
26.09 
23.08 
 
Tutored by peer 
13.99 
1.80 
4.35 
15.38 
 
Tutored by college / grad student 
19.17 
14.41 
4.35 
7.69 
 
Other tutor type 
7.25 
16.22 
26.09 
23.08 
 
Tutor type unknown 
29.53 
29.73 
17.39 
0.00 
Dosage 
 
  
  
  
 
Sessions per week 
3.31 
3.45 
3.55 
3.58 
 
 
(1.35) 
(1.09) 
(1.58) 
(1.68) 
 
Hours per session 
0.61 
0.60 
0.53 
0.72 
 
 
(0.44) 
(0.29) 
(0.23) 
(0.39) 
 
Hours per week 
1.98 
2.03 
1.90 
2.30 
 
 
(1.82) 
(1.06) 
(1.15) 
(1.33) 
 
Weeks per year 
15.02 
18.61 
18.48 
13.71 
 
 
(9.74) 
(7.90) 
(8.26) 
(3.30) 
 
Hours total dosage 
30.32 
39.17 
36.85 
27.00 
 
 
(31.68) 
(31.00) 
(35.10) 
(11.84) 
N interventions 
193 
111 
23 
13 
Notes: Except for dosage variables, all measures are percents scaled 0 to 100. Dosage variable units are 
indicated, with standard deviations presented in parentheses. 
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
57 
57 
Table 8. Meta-regression controlling for study and intervention features 
  
(1) 
(2) 
100-399 treated sample (ref. 0-99) 
-0.203*** 
(0.062) 
-0.140** 
(0.058) 
400-999 treated sample (ref. 0-99) 
-0.272*** 
(0.067) 
-0.164** 
(0.069) 
≥1,000 treated sample (ref. 0-99) 
-0.386*** 
(0.117) 
-0.284* 
(0.161) 
Published in 2000s (ref. pre-2000) 
  
  
0.152 
(0.157) 
Published in 2010s (ref. pre-2000) 
  
  
0.004 
(0.131) 
Published in 2020s (ref. pre-2000) 
  
  
0.054 
(0.151) 
Flag for poor RCT quality 
  
  
0.005  
(0.076) 
Lower elementary math (ref. LE reading) 
  
  
-0.150* 
(0.084) 
Upper elementary reading (ref. LE reading) 
  
  
-0.029 
(0.065) 
Upper elementary math (ref. LE reading) 
  
  
-0.122 
(0.104) 
Middle school reading (ref. LE reading) 
  
  
-0.073 
(0.140) 
Middle school math (ref. LE reading) 
  
  
-0.096 
(0.138) 
High school reading (ref. LE reading) 
  
  
-0.224 
(0.150) 
High school math (ref. LE reading) 
  
  
0.295 
(0.267) 
Researcher-generated assessment (ref. standardized test) 
  
0.164* 
0.224** 
OECD country (ref. USA) 
  
  
0.135 
(0.142) 
Tutoring delivered online (ref. in-person) 
  
  
0.034 
(0.171) 
Tutoring at multiple locations / other (ref. at school) 
  
-0.148 
-0.016 
Tutoring location missing (ref. at school) 
  
  
0.069 
(0.189) 
Curriculum not provided 
  
  
0.135 
(0.148) 
Tutoring outside of school hours (ref. during school) 
  
-0.165*** 
-0.192*** 
Tutoring timing missing (ref. during school) 
  
  
0.16 
(0.151) 
2:1 student-tutor ratio (ref. 1:1) 
  
  
0.053 
(0.063) 
3:1 student-tutor ratio (ref. 1:1) 
  
  
-0.058 
(0.087) 
4:1 student-tutor ratio (ref. 1:1) 
  
  
-0.059 
(0.077) 
≥5:1 student-tutor ratio (ref. 1:1) 
  
  
0.237 
(0.251) 
Ratio missing (ref. 1:1) 
  
  
-0.186* 
(0.102) 
Tutored by paraprofessional (ref. teacher) 
  
  
-0.042 
(0.088) 
Tutored by K-12 peer (ref. teacher) 
  
  
-0.056 
(0.125) 
Tutored by college / graduate student (ref. teacher) 
  
0.071 
-0.081 
Other tutor type (ref. teacher) 
  
  
-0.162* 
(0.088) 
Tutor type missing (ref. teacher) 
  
  
0.084 
(0.091) 
Total dosage 0-14 hours (ref. ≥60 hours) 
  
  
0.17 
(0.117) 
Total dosage 15-29 hours (ref. ≥60 hours) 
  
  
0.206** 
(0.092) 
Total dosage 30-44 hours (ref. ≥60 hours) 
  
  
0.15 
(0.106) 
Total dosage 45-59 hours (ref. ≥60 hours) 
  
  
0.213** 
(0.083) 
Total dosage missing (ref. ≥60 hours) 
  
  
0.057 
(0.089) 
Constant 
0.523*** 
(0.056) 
0.274 
(0.167) 
Observations 
2,223 
2,223 
Notes: *** p<0.10; ** p<0.05, * p<0.01. Standard errors are presented in parentheses. 
 
 
 
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
58 
58 
Table 9. Student sample characteristics by size of tutored student sample 
    
Treated student sample size 
    
0 to 99 
≥100 
Student Demographics 
  
  
  % Asian 
2.48 
2.40 
  % Black 
31.04 
33.52 
  % Hispanic / Latinx 
29.41 
24.98 
  % Native American 
2.41 
0.52 
  % Multiracial 
0.59 
2.26 
  % White 
28.71 
35.59 
  % Other 
6.23 
7.29 
  % free/reduced-price lunch 
72.83 
65.17 
  % special education 
28.80 
17.75 
  % English language learners 
30.70 
17.15 
Program Targeted to Certain Students 
  
  
  Any targeting 
92.75 
95.92 
  Targets low performers 
88.60 
85.71 
  Targets ELLs 
8.29 
0.68 
  Targets underserved students 
19.17 
21.77 
  Targets socioemotional problems 
3.11 
3.40 
N interventions 
193 
147 
Notes: Means are taken at the intervention level. All variables presented range from 0 
to 100.  
 
 
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
59 
59 
 
Table 10. Estimates for programs that combine best practices, stacked subjects 
No sample size 
restriction 
0-99 treated students 
100-399 treated 
students 
400-999 treated 
students 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Panel A. Subsample of programs in-person, at school, during school, with ratio no more than 
3:1, provided curricula, meeting ≥3 times per week, ≥15 hours of dosage 
0.433*** 
0.480*** 
0.394*** 
0.270*** 
(0.039) 
(0.059) 
(0.046) 
(0.068) 
732 
474 
216 
42 
Panel B. Subsample of programs using standardized tests, USA settings, in-person, at school, 
during school, with ratio no more than 3:1, provided curricula, meeting ≥3 times per week, ≥15 
hours of dosage 
0.385*** 
0.415*** 
0.373*** 
0.254*** 
(0.036) 
(0.053) 
(0.049) 
(0.073) 
519 
336 
147 
36 
Panel C. Subsample of programs standardized tests, USA settings, no outliers, published since 
2010, in-person, at school, during school, with ratio no more than 3:1, provided curricula, 
meeting ≥3 times per week, ≥15 hours of dosage 
0.375*** 
0.363*** 
0.390*** 
0.388*** 
(0.037) 
(0.059) 
(0.056) 
(0.066) 
299 
180 
103 
16 
Notes: *** p<0.10; ** p<0.05, * p<0.01. All cells stack estimates for math and reading. Column (1) 
presents the pooled meta-analytic estimated effect for the subsample of studies described in each panel. 
Columns (2) through (4) disaggregate the estimate in Column (1) according to the tutored student 
sample size. Panel A limits to the described subsample of programs sharing a set of best practices in 
their designs. Panel B restricts to studies with standardized test outcome measures and conducted in 
USA settings. Panel C additionally drops the top and bottom 2.5% of effect sizes from the whole sample 
(“no outliers”), and excludes studies published prior to 2010.  
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
60 
60 
 
 
Table 11a. Average effect sizes across different program design features, stacked subjects 
Delivery mode 
  
Student-tutor ratio 
In-person 
Virtual 
  
1:1 ratio 
2:1 ratio 
3:1 ratio 
4:1 ratio 
≥5:1 ratio 
(1) 
(2) 
  
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
Panel A. Full analytic sample with no restrictions 
0.438*** 
0.065** 
  
0.432*** 
0.406*** 
0.299*** 
0.341*** 
0.909** 
(0.036) 
(0.028) 
  
(0.040) 
(0.052) 
(0.045) 
(0.068) 
(0.364) 
2,164 
59 
  
1,061 
290 
314 
367 
154 
Panel B. Standardized tests only, USA settings only 
0.368*** 
0.052*** 
  
0.465*** 
0.298*** 
0.263*** 
0.248*** 
0.244*** 
(0.028) 
(0.005) 
  
(0.054) 
(0.056) 
(0.040) 
(0.041) 
(0.083) 
1,438 
46 
  
685 
189 
246 
282 
62 
Panel C. Standardized tests only, USA settings only, omitting the top and bottom 2.5% of effect sizes, studies published in or 
since 2010 
0.345*** 
0.052*** 
  
0.374*** 
0.268*** 
0.292*** 
0.286*** 
0.292*** 
(0.023) 
(0.005) 
  
(0.053) 
(0.094) 
(0.039) 
(0.042) 
(0.076) 
794 
46 
  
319 
87 
204 
173 
42 
Notes: *** p<0.10; ** p<0.05, * p<0.01. Each column isolates a subsample of effects according to tutoring program characteristics. All 
estimates stack math and reading. 
 
 
 
 
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
61 
61 
 
 
 
Table 11b. Average effect sizes across different program design features, stacked subjects 
Tutor type 
  
Total dosage of tutoring hours 
Teacher 
Paraeducator 
College / 
graduate 
student 
K-12 
peer 
  
0-14 
hours 
15-29 
hours 
30-44 
hours 
45-59 
hours 
≥60 
hours 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
  
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
Panel A. Full analytic sample with no restrictions 
0.381*** 
0.428*** 
0.397*** 
0.358***   0.541*** 0.484*** 0.465*** 0.422*** 0.256*** 
(0.055) 
(0.042) 
(0.049) 
(0.092) 
  
(0.133) 
(0.069) 
(0.067) 
(0.074) 
(0.044) 
496 
363 
328 
122 
  
481 
520 
399 
158 
342 
Panel B. Standardized tests only, USA settings only 
0.309*** 
0.396*** 
0.358*** 
0.429***   0.313*** 0.507*** 0.348*** 0.430*** 0.241*** 
(0.044) 
(0.046) 
(0.060) 
(0.127) 
  
(0.042) 
(0.102) 
(0.050) 
(0.091) 
(0.049) 
388 
229 
194 
93 
  
281 
323 
236 
109 
291 
Panel C. Standardized tests only, USA settings only, omitting the top and bottom 2.5% of effect sizes, studies 
published in or since 2010 
0.338*** 
0.355*** 
0.375*** 
0.109 
  0.308*** 0.412*** 0.305*** 0.398*** 0.220*** 
(0.046) 
(0.040) 
(0.075) 
(0.189) 
  
(0.045) 
(0.042) 
(0.044) 
(0.109) 
(0.066) 
200 
140 
133 
19 
  
208 
207 
116 
62 
124 
Notes: *** p<0.10; ** p<0.05, * p<0.01. Each column isolates a subsample of effects according to tutoring program 
characteristics. All estimates stack math and reading. 
 
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
62 
62 
Table 12a. Multi-arm studies experimentally comparing different student-tutor ratios 
Citation 
N 
Treated 
Students 
Subject 
Small 
Ratio 
Large 
Ratio 
Students per tutor 
Diff.  
(Small - 
Big) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
Carlana & La Ferrara, 2024 
607 
Multiple 
1:1 
2:1 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.09 
Clarke et al., 2017 
415 
Math 
2:1 
5:1 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.09 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.25 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.76 
Clarke et al., 2020 
880 
Math 
2:1 
5:1 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.02 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.03 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.03 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.03 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.12 
Clarke et al., 2023 
322 
Math 
2:1 
5:1 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.07 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.20 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.77 
Doabler et al., 2019 
465 
Math 
2:1 
5:1 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.04 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.10 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
-0.01 
Kraft & Lovison, 2024 
180 
Math 
1:1 
3:1 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.14 
Loeb et al., 2023 
1,080 
Reading 
1:1 
2:1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.06 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.03 
 
 
 
 
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
63 
63 
Table 12a. Continued 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Citation 
N 
Treated 
Students 
Subject 
Small 
Ratio 
Large 
Ratio 
Students per tutor 
Diff.  
(Small - 
Big) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 11 12 13 
Schwartz et al., 2012 
170 
Reading 
1:1 
3:1 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.30 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.36 
Vadasy & Sanders, 
2008 
54 
Reading 
1:1 
2:1 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.09 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.06 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.22 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
-0.08 
Vaughn et al., 2010 
514 
Reading 
4:1 
13:1 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
-0.10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.07 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.08 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.08 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.06 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.23 
Notes: All studies examine elementary programs except for three that study middle school programs: Carlana & La Ferrara (2024), Kraft & Lovison 
(2024) & Vaughn et al. (2010) 
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
64 
64 
Table 12b. Multi-arm studies experimentally comparing different dosages of tutoring 
  
Citation 
N of 
Treated 
Students 
Amount 
of Low 
Dosage 
Amount 
of High 
Dosage 
Total hours of tutoring 
Effect 
Size Diff.  
(High - 
Low) 
2 
8  
14 
20 
26 
32 
38 
44 
50 
56 
62 
68 
Al Otaiba et 
al., 2005 
49 
Two 20 
min. 
sessions / 
week 
Four 20 
min. 
sessions / 
week 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                        
0.01 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.01 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.12 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.18 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.13 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.15 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.18 
Begeny, 
2011 
58 
1.5 nine 
min. 
sessions / 
week 
Three 
nine min. 
sessions / 
week 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.10 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.29 
Carlana & 
La Ferrara, 
2021 
530 
Three 
hours / 
week 
Six hours 
/ week 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
Wanzek & 
Vaughn, 
2008 
35 
Five 30 
min. 
sessions / 
week 
Ten 30 
min. 
sessions / 
week 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.39 
                                                
-0.76 
Note: There is more than one effect in each study because authors report effects on multiple reading outcomes or assessments. All studies 
examine tutoring in reading subjects except for Carlana & La Ferrera (2021) which focused on multiple subjects.  
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
65 
65 
 
Appendix A. Included Studies 
 
Al Otaiba, S., Schatschneider, C., & Silverman, E. (2005). Tutor-assisted intensive learning 
strategies in kindergarten: How much is enough? Exceptionality, 13(4), 195–208. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327035ex1304_2 
Allen, A. A., & Lembke, E. S. (2022). The effect of a morphological awareness intervention on 
early writing outcomes. Learning Disability Quarterly, 45(2), 72–84. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0731948720912414 
Allor, J. H., Mathes, P. G., Roberts, J. K., Jones, F. G., & Champlin, T. M. (2010). Teaching 
students with moderate intellectual disabilities to read: An experimental examination of a 
comprehensive reading intervention. Education and Training in Autism and 
Developmental Disabilities, 45(1), 3–22. 
Allor, J., & McCathren, R. (2004). The efficacy of an early literacy tutoring program 
implemented by college students. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 19(2), 116–
129. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5826.2004.00095.x 
Altman, J. R., D’Brot, J. M., & Akhtar, N. M. (2016). America Reads - Mississippi: An impact 
evaluation of the program’s 2015-2016 school year. TerraLuna Collective. 
Amendum, S. J., Vernon-Feagans, L., & Ginsberg, M. C. (2011). The effectiveness of a 
technologically facilitated classroom-based early reading intervention. The Elementary 
School Journal, 112(1), 107–131. https://doi.org/10.1086/660684 
Anderberg, R. G. (2013). The effects of cross-age tutoring on the reading ability of first and 
second grade students. Middle Tennessee State University. 
Apel, K., & Diehm, E. (2014). Morphological awareness intervention with kindergarteners and 
first and second grade students from low ses homes: A small efficacy study. Journal of 
Learning Disabilities, 47(1), 65–75. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022219413509964 
Baker, D. L., Burns, D., Kame’enui, E. J., Smolkowski, K., & Baker, S. K. (2016). Does 
supplemental instruction support the transition from Spanish to English reading 
instruction for first-grade english learners at risk of reading difficulties? Learning 
Disability Quarterly, 39(4), 226–239. https://doi.org/10.1177/0731948715616757 
Baker, S., Gersten, R., & Keating, T. (2000). When less may be more: A 2-year longitudinal 
evaluation of a volunteer tutoring program requiring minimal training. Reading Research 
Quarterly, 35(4), 494–519. https://doi.org/10.1598/RRQ.35.4.3 
Ball, E. W., & Blachman, B. A. (1991). Does phoneme awareness training in kindergarten make 
a difference in early word recognition and developmental spelling? Reading Research 
Quarterly, 26(1), 49–66. 
Bausell, R. B., Moody, W. B., & Walzl, F. N. (1972). A factorial study of tutoring versus 
classroom instruction. American Educational Research Journal, 9(4), 591–597. 
https://doi.org/10.3102/00028312009004591 
Begeny, J. C. (2011). Effects of the Helping Early Literacy with Practice Strategies (helps) 
reading fluency program when implemented at different frequencies. School Psychology 
Review, 40(1), 149–157. https://doi.org/10.1080/02796015.2011.12087734 
Blachman, B. A., Schatschneider, C., Fletcher, J. M., Francis, D. J., Clonan, S. M., Shaywitz, B. 
A., & Shaywitz, S. E. (2004). Effects of intensive reading remediation for second and 
third graders and a 1-year follow-up. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(3), 444–
461. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.96.3.444 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
66 
66 
Blackburn, S. (2014). The effect of the HELPS program on the oral reading fluency and 
accuracy rates of third-, fourth-, and fifth-grade students [Gardner-Webb University]. 
https://digitalcommons.gardner-webb.edu/education_etd/4 
Bøg, M., Dietrichson, J., & Aldenius, A. (2019). A multi-sensory tutoring program for students 
at-risk of reading difficulties: Evidence from a randomized field experiment (Working 
Paper 2019:7). Working Paper. https://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/201471 
Bonesrønning, H., Finseraas, H., Hardoy, I., Iversen, J. M. V., Nyhus, O. H., Opheim, V., 
Salvanes, K. V., Sandsør, A. M. J., & Schøne, P. (2022). Small-group instruction to 
improve student performance in mathematics in early grades: Results from a randomized 
field experiment. Journal of Public Economics, 216, 104765. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2022.104765 
Borman, G. D., Borman, T. H., Park, S. J., & Houghton, S. (2020). A multisite randomized 
controlled trial of the effectiveness of Descubriendo la Lectura. American Educational 
Research Journal, 57(5), 1995–2020. https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831219890612 
Bramuchi, L. H. (2009). Reading interventions to improve: Oral reading fluency and literal 
comprehension [Ed.D.]. Delta State University. 
Bryant, D. P., Bryant, B. R., Roberts, G., Vaughn, S., Pfannenstiel, K. H., Porterfield, J., & 
Gersten, R. (2011). Early numeracy intervention program for first-grade students with 
mathematics difficulties. Exceptional Children, 78(1), 7–23. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/001440291107800101 
Buckingham, J., Wheldall, K., & Beaman, R. (2012). A randomised control trial of a Tier-2 
small-group intervention (‘MiniLit’) for young struggling readers1. Australian Journal of 
Learning Difficulties, 17(2), 79–99. https://doi.org/10.1080/19404158.2012.717537 
Cabezas, V., Cuesta, J. I., & Gallego, F. A. (2011). Effects of short-term tutoring on cognitive 
and non-cognitive skills: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in Chile. Abdul Latif 
Jameel Poverty Action Lab. https://www.povertyactionlab.org/sites/default/files/research-
paper/493%20-%20short-term%20tutoring%20May2011.pdf 
Calhoon, M. B., Al Otaiba, S., Greenberg, D., King, A., & Avalos, A. (2006). Improving reading 
skills in predominantly Hispanic title 1 first-grade classrooms: The promise of Peer-
Assisted Learning Strategies. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 21(4), 261–
272. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5826.2006.00222.x 
Carlton, M. B., Litton, F. W., & Zinkgraf, S. A. (1985). The effects of an intraclass peer tutoring 
program on the sight-word recognition ability of students who are mildly mentally 
retarded. Mental Retardation, 23(2), 74–78. 
Case, L., Speece, D., Silverman, R., Schatschneider, C., Montanaro, E., & Ritchey, K. (2014). 
Immediate and long-term effects of tier 2 reading instruction for first-grade students with 
a high probability of reading failure. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 
7(1), 28–53. https://doi.org/10.1080/19345747.2013.786771 
Center, Y., Wheldall, K., Freeman, L., Outhred, L., & McNaught, M. (1995). An evaluation of 
Reading Recovery. Reading Research Quarterly, 30(2), 240–263. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/748034 
Cirino, P. T., Vaughn, S., Linan-Thompson, S., Cardenas-Hagan, E., Fletcher, J. M., & Francis, 
D. J. (2009). One-year follow-up outcomes of Spanish and English interventions for 
English language learners at risk for reading problems. American Educational Research 
Journal, 46(3), 744–781. https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831208330214 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
67 
67 
Clarke, B., Doabler, C., Smolkowski, K., Kurtz Nelson, E., Fien, H., Baker, S. K., & Kosty, D. 
(2016). Testing the immediate and long-term efficacy of a tier 2 kindergarten 
mathematics intervention. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 9(4), 607–
634. https://doi.org/10.1080/19345747.2015.1116034 
Clarke, B., Doabler, C. T., Kosty, D., Kurtz Nelson, E., Smolkowski, K., Fien, H., & Turtura, J. 
(2017). Testing the efficacy of a kindergarten mathematics intervention by small group 
size. AERA Open, 3(2), 233285841770689. https://doi.org/10.1177/2332858417706899 
Clarke, B., Doabler, C. T., Smolkowski, K., Baker, S. K., Fien, H., & Strand Cary, M. (2016). 
Examining the efficacy of a tier 2 kindergarten mathematics intervention. Journal of 
Learning Disabilities, 49(2), 152–165. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022219414538514 
Clarke, B., Doabler, C. T., Turtura, J., Smolkowski, K., Kosty, D. B., Sutherland, M., Kurtz-
Nelson, E., Fien, H., & Baker, S. K. (2020). Examining the efficacy of a kindergarten 
mathematics intervention by group size and initial skill: Implications for practice and 
policy. The Elementary School Journal, 121(1), 125–153. https://doi.org/10.1086/710041 
Clarke, P. J., Snowling, M. J., Truelove, E., & Hulme, C. (2010). Ameliorating children’s 
reading-comprehension difficulties: A randomized controlled trial. Psychological 
Science, 21(8), 1106–1116. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797610375449 
Cloward, R. D. (1967). Studies in tutoring. The Journal of Experimental Education. 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00220973.1967.11011022 
Codding, R. S., Nelson, P. M., Parker, D. C., Edmunds, R., & Klaft, J. (2022). Examining the 
impact of a tutoring program implemented with community support on math proficiency 
and growth. Journal of School Psychology, 90, 82–93. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsp.2021.11.002 
Cook, J. A. (2001). Every moment counts: Pairing struggling young readers with minimally 
trained tutors. Arizona State University. 
Cook, P. J., Dodge, K., Farkas, G., Fryer, J., Roland G., Guryan, J., Ludwig, J., Mayer, S., 
Pollack, H., & Steinberg, L. (2014). The (surprising) efficacy of academic and behavioral 
intervention with disadvantaged youth: Results from a randomized experiment in chicago 
(Working Paper No. 19862). National Bureau of Economic Research. 
https://doi.org/10.3386/w19862 
Cortes, K., Kortecamp, K., Loeb, S., & Robinson, C. (2023). A scalable approach to high-impact 
tutoring for young readers: Results of a randomized controlled trial [Working Paper]. 
National Student Support Accelerator. 
Courtney, M. E., Zinn, A., Zielewski, E. H., Bess, R. J., Malm, K. E., Stagner, M., & Pergamit, 
M. (2008). Evaluation of the Early Start to Emancipation Preparation Tutoring Program, 
Los Angeles County, California: Final report. In Administration for Children & Families. 
Administration for Children & Families. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED502639 
Coyne, M. D., McCoach, D. B., Ware, S., Austin, C. R., Loftus-Rattan, S. M., & Baker, D. L. 
(2019). Racing against the vocabulary gap: Matthew effects in early vocabulary 
instruction and intervention. Exceptional Children, 85(2), 163–179. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0014402918789162 
Dahlem, G. G. (1973). The effect of like ethnic qualities upon reading tutoring of third graders. 
final report. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED095488 
De Ree, J., Maggioni, M. A., Paulle, B., Rossignoli, D., Ruijs, N., & Walentek, D. (2023). 
Closing the income-achievement gap? Experimental evidence from high-dosage tutoring 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
68 
68 
in Dutch primary education. Economics of Education Review, 94, 102383. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2023.102383 
De Ree, J., Maggioni, M. A., Paulle, B., Rossignoli, D., & Walentek, D. (2021). High dosage 
tutoring in pre-vocational secondary education: Experimental evidence from Amsterdam. 
OSF. https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/r56um 
Denton, C. A., Anthony, J. L., Parker, R., & Hasbrouck, J. E. (2004). Effects of two tutoring 
programs on the English reading development of Spanish-English bilingual students. The 
Elementary School Journal, 104(4), 289–305. https://doi.org/10.1086/499754 
Denton, C. A., Fletcher, J. M., Taylor, W. P., Barth, A. E., & Vaughn, S. (2014). An 
experimental evaluation of guided reading and explicit interventions for primary-grade 
students at-risk for reading difficulties. Journal of Research on Educational 
Effectiveness, 7(3), 268–293. https://doi.org/10.1080/19345747.2014.906010 
Denton, C. A., Nimon, K., Mathes, P. G., Swanson, E. A., Kethley, C., Kurz, T. B., & Shih, M. 
(2010). Effectiveness of a supplemental early reading intervention scaled up in multiple 
schools. Exceptional Children, 76(4), 394–416. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/001440291007600402 
Denton, C. A., Tolar, T. D., Fletcher, J. M., Barth, A. E., Vaughn, S., & Francis, D. J. (2013). 
Effects of tier 3 intervention for students with persistent reading difficulties and 
characteristics of inadequate responders. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105(3), 
633–648. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0032581 
Denton, C. A., Wexler, J., Vaughn, S., & Bryan, D. (2008). Intervention provided to 
linguistically diverse middle school students with severe reading difficulties. Learning 
Disabilities Research & Practice, 23(2), 79–89. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-
5826.2008.00266.x 
Doabler, C. T., Clarke, B., Kosty, D. B., Kurtz-Nelson, E., Fien, H., Smolkowski, K., & Baker, 
S. K. (2016). Testing the efficacy of a tier 2 mathematics intervention: A conceptual 
replication study. Exceptional Children, 83(1), 92–110. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0014402916660084 
Dyson, N. I., Jordan, N. C., & Glutting, J. (2013). A number sense intervention for low-income 
kindergartners at risk for mathematics difficulties. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 
46(2), 166–181. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022219411410233 
Eddy, R. M., Ruitman, H. T., Hankel, N., Matelski, M. H., & Schmalstig, M. (2011). Pearson 
words their way: Word study in action. Cobblestone Applied Research & Evaluation, Inc. 
Ehri, L. C., Dreyer, L. G., Flugman, B., & Gross, A. (2007). Reading Rescue: An effective 
tutoring intervention model for language-minority students who are struggling readers in 
first grade. American Educational Research Journal, 44(2), 414–448. 
https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831207302175 
Esser, M. M. S. (2001). The effects of metacognitive strategy training and attribution retraining 
on reading comprehension in African -American students with learning disabilities 
[Ph.D., The University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee]. 
https://www.proquest.com/docview/250846378/abstract/42880F0E3B474B17PQ/1 
Fälth, L., Svensson, E., & Ström, A. (2020). Intensive phonological training with articulation—
an intervention study to boost pupils’ word decoding in grade 1. Journal of Cognitive 
Education and Psychology, 19(2), 161–171. https://doi.org/10.1891/JCEP-D-20-00015 
Fantuzzo, J. W., Davis, G. Y., & Ginsburg, M. D. (1995). Effects of parent involvement in 
isolation or in combination with peer tutoring on student self-concept and mathematics 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
69 
69 
achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 87(2), 272–281. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.87.2.272 
Fantuzzo, J. W., King, J. A., & Heller, L. R. (1992). Effects of reciprocal peer tutoring on 
mathematics and school adjustment: A component analysis. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 84(3), 331–339. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.84.3.331 
Fariss, L. L. (2013). The effects of small group vocabulary instruction on second grade students’ 
expressive vocabularies. Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. 
Fesler, L., Gu, A., & Chojnacki, G. (2023). Air tutors’ online tutoring: Math knowledge impacts 
and participant math perceptions. middle years math grantee report series. In 
Mathematica. Mathematica. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED628638 
Fien, H., Santoro, L., Baker, S. K., Park, Y., Chard, D. J., Williams, S., & Haria, P. (2011). 
Enhancing teacher read alouds with small-group vocabulary instruction for students with 
low vocabulary in first-grade classrooms. School Psychology Review, 40(2), 307–318. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02796015.2011.12087720 
Fien, H., Smith, J. L. M., Smolkowski, K., Baker, S. K., Nelson, N. J., & Chaparro, E. (2015). 
An examination of the efficacy of a multitiered intervention on early reading outcomes 
for first grade students at risk for reading difficulties. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 
48(6), 602–621. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022219414521664 
Finnegan, E. G. (2012). Two approaches to phonics instruction: Comparison of effects with 
children with significant cognitive disability. Education and Training in Autism and 
Developmental Disabilities, 47(3), 269–279. 
Fitz-Gibbon, C. T. (1975). The role of change intervention: An experiment in cross-age tutoring. 
University of California Los Angeles. 
Fives, A., Kearns, N., Devaney, C., Canavan, J., Russell, D., Lyons, R., Eaton, P., & O’Brien, A. 
(2013). A one‐to‐one programme for at‐risk readers delivered by older adult volunteers. 
Review of Education, 1(3), 254–280. https://doi.org/10.1002/rev3.3016 
Fraga González, G., Žarić, G., Tijms, J., Bonte, M., Blomert, L., & Van Der Molen, M. W. 
(2015). A randomized controlled trial on the beneficial effects of training letter-speech 
sound integration on reading fluency in children with dyslexia. PLOS ONE, 10(12), 
e0143914. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0143914 
Fresko, B., & Eisenberg, T. (1985). The effect of two years of tutoring on mathematics and 
reading achievement. The Journal of Experimental Education, 53(4), 193–201. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00220973.1985.10806381 
Fuchs, D., Fuchs, L. S., Mathes, P. G., & Simmons, D. C. (1997). Peer-Assisted Learning 
Strategies: Making classrooms more responsive to diversity. American Educational 
Research Journal, 34(1), 174–206. https://doi.org/10.2307/1163346 
Fuchs, D., Hendricks, E., Walsh, M. E., Fuchs, L. S., Gilbert, J. K., Zhang Tracy, W., Patton, S., 
Davis‐Perkins, N., Kim, W., Elleman, A. M., & Peng, P. (2018). Evaluating a 
multidimensional reading comprehension program and reconsidering the lowly reputation 
of tests of near‐transfer. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 33(1), 11–23. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/ldrp.12162 
Fuchs, D., Kearns, D. M., Fuchs, L. S., Elleman, A. M., Gilbert, J. K., Patton, S., Peng, P., & 
Compton, D. L. (2019). Using moderator analysis to identify the first-grade children who 
benefit more and less from a reading comprehension program: A step toward aptitude-by-
treatment interaction. Exceptional Children, 85(2), 229–247. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0014402918802801 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
70 
70 
Fuchs, L. S., Compton, D. L., Fuchs, D., Paulsen, K., Bryant, J. D., & Hamlett, C. L. (2005). The 
prevention, identification, and cognitive determinants of math difficulty. Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 97(3), 493–513. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.97.3.493 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Craddock, C., Hollenbeck, K. N., Hamlett, C. L., & Schatschneider, C. 
(2008). Effects of small-group tutoring with and without validated classroom instruction 
on at-risk students’ math problem solving: Are two tiers of prevention better than one? 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 100(3), 491–509. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-
0663.100.3.491 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., & Gilbert, J. K. (2019). Does the severity of students’ pre-intervention 
math deficits affect responsiveness to generally effective first-grade intervention? 
Exceptional Children, 85(2), 147–162. https://doi.org/10.1177/0014402918782628 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Hamlett, C. L., & Appleton, A. C. (2002). Explicitly teaching for 
transfer: Effects on the mathematical problem-solving performance of students with 
mathematics disabilities. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 17(2), 90–106. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1540-5826.00036 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., & Karns, K. (2001). Enhancing kindergartners’ mathematical 
development: Effects of Peer-Assisted Learning Strategies. The Elementary School 
Journal, 101(5), 495–510. https://doi.org/10.1086/499684 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Kazdan, S., & Allen, S. (1999). Effects of Peer-Assisted Learning 
Strategies in reading with and without training in elaborated help giving. The Elementary 
School Journal, 99(3), 201–219. https://doi.org/10.1086/461923 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Phillips, N. B., Hamlett, C. L., & Earns, K. (1995). Acquisition and 
transfer effects of classwide Peer-Assisted Learning Strategies in mathematics for 
students with varying learning histories. School Psychology Review, 24(4), 604–620. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02796015.1995.12085790 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Yazdian, L., & Powell, S. R. (2002). Enhancing first-grade children’s 
mathematical development with Peer-Assisted Learning Strategies. School Psychology 
Review, 31(4), 569–583. https://doi.org/10.1080/02796015.2002.12086175 
Fuchs, L. S., Geary, D. C., Compton, D. L., Fuchs, D., Schatschneider, C., Hamlett, C. L., 
DeSelms, J., Seethaler, P. M., Wilson, J., Craddock, C. F., Bryant, J. D., Luther, K., & 
Changas, P. (2013). Effects of first-grade number knowledge tutoring with contrasting 
forms of practice. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105(1), 58–77. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0030127 
Fuchs, L. S., Malone, A. S., Schumacher, R. F., Namkung, J., Hamlett, C. L., Jordan, N. C., 
Siegler, R. S., Gersten, R., & Changas, P. (2016). Supported self-explaining during 
fraction intervention. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108(4), 493–508. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000073 
Fuchs, L. S., Powell, S. R., Seethaler, P. M., Cirino, P. T., Fletcher, J. M., Fuchs, D., & Hamlett, 
C. L. (2010). The effects of strategic counting instruction, with and without deliberate 
practice, on number combination skill among students with mathematics difficulties. 
Learning and Individual Differences, 20(2), 89–100. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2009.09.003 
Fuchs, L. S., Powell, S. R., Seethaler, P. M., Cirino, P. T., Fletcher, J. M., Fuchs, D., Hamlett, C. 
L., & Zumeta, R. O. (2009). Remediating number combination and word problem deficits 
among students with mathematics difficulties: A randomized control trial. Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 101(3), 561–576. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0014701 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
71 
71 
Fuchs, L. S., Schumacher, R. F., Long, J., Namkung, J., Hamlett, C. L., Cirino, P. T., Jordan, N. 
C., Siegler, R., Gersten, R., & Changas, P. (2013). Improving at-risk learners’ 
understanding of fractions. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105(3), 683–700. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0032446 
Fuchs, L. S., Schumacher, R. F., Long, J., Namkung, J., Malone, A. S., Wang, A., Hamlett, C. L., 
Jordan, N. C., Siegler, R. S., & Changas, P. (2016). Effects of intervention to improve at-
risk fourth graders’ understanding, calculations, and word problems with fractions. The 
Elementary School Journal, 116(4), 625–651. https://doi.org/10.1086/686303 
Fuchs, L. S., Seethaler, P. M., Powell, S. R., Fuchs, D., Hamlett, C. L., & Fletcher, J. M. (2008). 
Effects of preventative tutoring on the mathematical problem solving of third-grade 
students with math and reading difficulties. Exceptional Children, 74(2), 155–173. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/001440290807400202 
Fuchs, L. S., Seethaler, P. M., Sterba, S. K., Craddock, C., Fuchs, D., Compton, D. L., Geary, D. 
C., & Changas, P. (2019). Schema-based word-problem intervention with and without 
embedded language comprehension instruction (2020-13446-001). Vanderbilt 
University. 
Gallagher, T. L. (2005). An after-school literacy program : investigating the experiences of 
students with literacy difficulties, their volunteer tutors, and the tutors’ transition into the 
teaching profession [Brock University]. https://dr.library.brocku.ca/handle/10464/1455 
Gattis, M. N., Morrow-Howell, N., McCrary, S., Lee, M., Jonson-Reid, M., McCoy, H., Tamar, 
K., Molina, A., & Invernizzi, M. (2010). Examining the effects of New York Experience 
Corps® program on young readers. Literacy Research and Instruction, 49(4), 299–314. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/19388070903117948 
Gelzheiser, L. M., Scanlon, D., Vellutino, F., Hallgren-Flynn, L., & Schatschneider, C. (2011). 
Effects of the interactive strategies approach—extended: A responsive and 
comprehensive intervention for intermediate-grade struggling readers. The Elementary 
School Journal, 112(2), 280–306. https://doi.org/10.1086/661525 
Gersten, R., Rolfhus, E., Clarke, B., Decker, L. E., Wilkins, C., & Dimino, J. (2015). 
Intervention for first graders with limited number knowledge: Large-scale replication of a 
randomized controlled trial. American Educational Research Journal, 52(3), 516–546. 
https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831214565787 
Gilbert, J. K., Compton, D. L., Fuchs, D., Fuchs, L. S., Bouton, B., Barquero, L. A., & Cho, E. 
(2013). Efficacy of a first‐grade responsiveness‐to‐intervention prevention model for 
struggling readers. Reading Research Quarterly, 48(2), 135–154. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/rrq.45 
Gortazar, Lucas, Hupkau, Claudia, & Roldan, Antonio. (2023). Online tutoring works: 
Experimental evidence from a program with vulnerable children (EdWorkingPaper No. 
23–743). Annenberg Institute for School Reform at Brown University. 
https://edworkingpapers.com/ai23-743 
Greene, I., Tiernan, A. M., & Holloway, J. (2018). Cross-age peer tutoring and fluency-based 
instruction to achieve fluency with mathematics computation skills: A randomized 
controlled trial. Journal of Behavioral Education, 27(2), 145–171. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10864-018-9291-1 
Gunn, B., Biglan, A., Smolkowski, K., & Ary, D. (2000). The efficacy of supplemental 
instruction in decoding skills for Hispanic and non-Hispanic students in early elementary 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
72 
72 
school. The Journal of Special Education, 34(2), 90–103. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/002246690003400204 
Gunn, B., Smolkowski, K., Biglan, A., & Black, C. (2002). Supplemental instruction in decoding 
skills for Hispanic and non-Hispanic students in early elementary school: A follow-up. 
The Journal of Special Education, 36(2), 69–79. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/00224669020360020201 
Gunn, B., Smolkowski, K., Biglan, A., Black, C., & Blair, J. (2005). Fostering the development 
of reading skill through supplemental instruction: Results for Hispanic and non-Hispanic 
students. The Journal of Special Education, 39(2), 66–85. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/00224669050390020301 
Guryan, J., Ludwig, J., Bhatt, M. P., Cook, P. J., Davis, J. M. V., Dodge, K., Farkas, G., Fryer, 
R. G., Mayer, S., Pollack, H., Steinberg, L., & Stoddard, G. (2023). Not too late: 
Improving academic outcomes among adolescents. American Economic Review, 113(3), 
738–765. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20210434 
Harper, J. M. (2012). The effectiveness of a group-based tutorial direct instruction program for 
long-term fostercare children: A randomized controlled trial. Lakehead University. 
Harper, J., & Schmidt, F. (2012). Preliminary effects of a group-based tutoring program for 
children in long-term foster care. Children and Youth Services Review, 34(6), 1176–1182. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.childyouth.2012.01.040 
Harper, J., & Schmidt, F. (2016). Effectiveness of a group-based academic tutoring program for 
children in foster care: A randomized controlled trial. Children and Youth Services 
Review, 67, 238–246. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.childyouth.2016.06.009 
Harty, K., Kanfush, P. M., & Riordan, M. (2019). Improving oral reading fluency and 
comprehension using grade-level fiction: A study of systematic reading remediation with 
urban youth at risk for school failure. Reading Improvement, 56(2), 59–66. 
Hassinger-Das, B., Jordan, N. C., & Dyson, N. (2015). Reading stories to learn math. The 
Elementary School Journal, 116(2), 242–264. https://doi.org/10.1086/683986 
Hebert, M. A., Powell, S. R., Bohaty, J., & Roehling, J. (2019). Piloting a mathematics‐writing 
intervention with late elementary students at‐risk for learning difficulties. Learning 
Disabilities Research & Practice, 34(3), 144–157. https://doi.org/10.1111/ldrp.12202 
Heller, L. R., & Fantuzzo, J. W. (1993). Reciprocal peer tutoring and parent partnership: Does 
parent involvement make a difference? School Psychology Review, 22(3), 517–534. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02796015.1993.12085670 
Hickey, A. J., & Flynn, R. J. (2019). Effects of the TutorBright tutoring programme on the 
reading and mathematics skills of children in foster care: a randomised controlled trial. 
Oxford Review of Education, 45(4), 519–537. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/03054985.2019.1607724 
Horan, J. J., de Girolomo, M. A., Hill, R. L., & Shute, R. E. (1974). The effect of older-peer 
participant models on deficient academic performance. Psychology in the Schools, 11(2), 
207–212. 
Hund-Reid, C., & Schneider, P. (2013). Effectiveness of phonological awareness intervention for 
kindergarten children with language impairment. Canadian Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology & Audiology, 37(1), 6–25. 
Jacob, R., Armstrong, C., Bowden, A. B., & Pan, Y. (2016). Leveraging volunteers: An 
experimental evaluation of a tutoring program for struggling readers. Journal of Research 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
73 
73 
on Educational Effectiveness, 9(sup1), 67–92. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/19345747.2016.1138560 
Jacob, R., Erickson, A., & Mattera, S. (2020). Evaluating the impact of small group 
supplemental math enrichment in kindergarten. Journal of Research on Educational 
Effectiveness, 13(3), 381–407. https://doi.org/10.1080/19345747.2020.1726539 
Jacob, R., & Jacob, B. (2018). New evidence on the benefits of small group math instruction for 
young children. In Center on Children and Families at Brookings (Vol 2, 55; Evidence 
Speaks Reports). Center on Children and Families at Brookings. 
Jayanthi, M., Gersten, R., Schumacher, R. F., Dimino, J., Smolkowski, K., & Spallone, S. 
(2021). Improving struggling fifth-grade students’ understanding of fractions: A 
randomized controlled trial of an intervention that stresses both concepts and procedures. 
Exceptional Children, 88(1), 81–100. https://doi.org/10.1177/00144029211008851 
Jenkins, J. R., Peyton, J. A., Sanders, E. A., & Vadasy, P. F. (2004). Effects of reading decodable 
texts in supplemental first-grade tutoring. Scientific Studies of Reading, 8(1), 53–85. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/s1532799xssr0801_4 
Jitendra, A. K., Dupuis, D. N., Rodriguez, M. C., Zaslofsky, A. F., Slater, S., Cozine-Corroy, K., 
& Church, C. (2013). A randomized controlled trial of the impact of schema-based 
instruction on mathematical outcomes for third-grade students with mathematics 
difficulties. The Elementary School Journal, 114(2), 252–276. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/673199 
Jones, C. (2018). SPARK early literacy: Testing the impact of a family-school-community 
partnership literacy intervention. School Community Journal, 28(2), 247–264. 
Jones, C. J., & Christian, M. (2021). The results of a randomized control trial evaluation of the 
SPARK literacy program: An innovative approach that pairs one-on-one tutoring with 
family engagement. Journal of Education for Students Placed at Risk (JESPAR), 26(3), 
185–209. https://doi.org/10.1080/10824669.2020.1809419 
Jones, C. J., Christian, M., & Rice, A. (2016). The results of a randomized control trial 
evaluation of the SPARK literacy program. In Society for Research on Educational 
Effectiveness. Society for Research on Educational Effectiveness. 
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED567484 
Jordan, N. C., Glutting, J., Dyson, N., Hassinger-Das, B., & Irwin, C. (2012). Building 
kindergartners’ number sense: A randomized controlled study. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 104(3), 647–660. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029018 
Kerins, M. R., Trotter, D., & Schoenbrodt, L. (2010). Effects of a tier 2 intervention on literacy 
measures: Lessons learned. Child Language Teaching and Therapy, 26(3), 287–302. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0265659009349985 
King, B., & Kasim, A. (2015). Rapid Phonics evaluation report and executive summary. 
Education Endowment Foundation. 
Kirkebøen, L. J., Gunnes, T., Lindenskov, L., & Rønning, M. (2021). Didactic methods and 
small-group instruction for low-performing adolescents in mathematics: Results from a 
randomized controlled trial (Working Paper No. 957). Discussion Papers. 
https://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/249147 
Kortecamp, K., & Peters, M. L. (2023). The impact of a high-dosage tutoring program on 
reading achievement of beginning readers: A multi-level analysis. Journal of Education 
for Students Placed at Risk (JESPAR), 1–19. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10824669.2023.2179056 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
74 
74 
Kraft, M. A., List, J. A., Livingston, J. A., & Sadoff, S. (2022). Online tutoring by college 
volunteers: experimental evidence from a pilot program. AEA Papers and Proceedings, 
112, 614–618. https://doi.org/10.1257/pandp.20221038 
Lachney, R. (2002). Adult-mediated reading instruction for third through fifth grade children 
with reading difficulties [Doctor of Philosophy, Louisiana State University and 
Agricultural and Mechanical College]. LSU Doctoral Dissertation. 
https://doi.org/10.31390/gradschool_dissertations.3483 
Lane, H. B., Pullen, P. C., Hudson, R. F., & Konold, T. R. (2009). Identifying essential 
instructional components of literacy tutoring for struggling beginning readers. Literacy 
Research and Instruction, 48(4), 277–297. https://doi.org/10.1080/19388070902875173 
Lane, K. L., Fletcher, T., Carter, E. W., Dejud, C., & Delorenzo, J. (2007). Paraprofessional-led 
phonological awareness training with youngsters at risk for reading and behavioral 
concerns. Remedial and Special Education, 28(5), 266–276. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/07419325070280050201 
Lee, C. C. (1980). The homework helper program: Volunteer service for academic and social 
enrichment in the elementary school. The School Counselor, 28(1), 11–21. 
Lee, Y. S., Morrow-Howell, N., Jonson-Reid, M., & McCrary, S. (2012). The effect of the 
Experience Corps® program on student reading outcomes. Education and Urban Society, 
44(1), 97–118. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013124510381262 
Lennon, J. E., & Slesinski, C. (1999). Early intervention in reading: Results of a screening and 
intervention program for kindergarten students. School Psychology Review, 28(3), 353–
364. https://doi.org/10.1080/02796015.1999.12085970 
Lindo, E. J., Weiser, B., Cheatham, J. P., & Allor, J. H. (2018). Benefits of structured after-
school literacy tutoring by university students for struggling elementary readers. Reading 
& Writing Quarterly, 34(2), 117–131. https://doi.org/10.1080/10573569.2017.1357156 
Lloyd, C., Edovald, T., Kiss, Z., Morris, S., Skipp, A., & Ahmed, H. (2015). Paired reading: 
Evaluation report and executive summary. In Education Endowment Foundation. 
Education Endowment Foundation. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED581127 
Lloyd, C., Edovald, T., Morris, S. P., Skipp, A., KIss, Z., & Haywood, S. (2015). Durham 
Shared Maths Project. Evaluation report and executive summary [Report]. Education 
Endowment Foundation. https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/ 
Loeb, S., Novicoff, S., Pollard, C., Robinson, C., & White, S. (2023). The effects of virtual 
tutoring on young readers: Results from a randomized controlled trial. National Student 
Support Accelerator. 
Loenen, A. (1989). The effectiveness of volunteer reading help and the nature of the reading help 
provided in practice. British Educational Research Journal, 15(3), 297–316. 
Lord, P., Bradshaw, S., Stevens, E., & Styles, B. (2015). Perry Beeches Coaching Programme: 
Evaluation report and executive summary. In Education Endowment Foundation. 
Education Endowment Foundation. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED581144 
Lorenzo, S. L. (1993). Effects of an experimental mentoring program on measures of 
performance of at-risk elementary students. University of South Florida. 
Mantzicopoulos, P., Morrison, D., Stone, E., & Setrakian, W. (1992). Use of the 
SEARCH/TEACH tutoring approach with middle-class students at risk for reading 
failure. The Elementary School Journal, 92(5), 573–586. https://doi.org/10.1086/461707 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
75 
75 
Markovitz, C. E., Hernandez, M. W., Hedberg, E. C., & Silberglitt, B. (2014). Impact evaluation 
of the Minnesota Reading Corps K-3 program. Corporation for National and Community 
Service. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED560018 
Markovitz, C. E., Hernandez, M. W., Hedberg, E. C., & Whitmore, H. W. (2022). Evaluating the 
effectiveness of a volunteer one-on-one tutoring model for early elementary reading 
intervention: A randomized controlled trial replication study. American Educational 
Research Journal, 59(4), 788–819. https://doi.org/10.3102/00028312211066848 
Marr, M. B., Algozzine, B., Nicholson, K., & Keller Dugan, K. (2011). Building oral reading 
fluency with peer coaching. Remedial and Special Education, 32(3), 256–264. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0741932510362202 
Mason, L. H., Davison, M. D., Hammer, C. S., Miller, C. A., & Glutting, J. J. (2013). 
Knowledge, writing, and language outcomes for a reading comprehension and writing 
intervention. Reading and Writing, 26(7), 1133–1158. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-
012-9409-0 
Mathes, P. G., & Babyak, A. E. (2001). The effects of Peer-Assisted Literacy Strategies for first-
grade readers with and without additional mini-skills lessons. Learning Disabilities 
Research & Practice, 16(1), 28–44. https://doi.org/10.1111/0938-8982.00004 
Mathes, P. G., Denton, C. A., Fletcher, J. M., Anthony, J. L., Francis, D. J., & Schatschneider, C. 
(2005). The effects of theoretically different instruction and student characteristics on the 
skills of struggling readers. Reading Research Quarterly, 40(2), 148–182. 
https://doi.org/10.1598/RRQ.40.2.2 
Mathes, P. G., Torgesen, J. K., Clancy-Menchetti, J., Santi, K., Nicholas, K., Robinson, C., & 
Grek, M. (2003). A comparison of teacher-directed versus peer-assisted instruction to 
struggling first-grade readers. The Elementary School Journal, 103(5), 459–479. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/499735 
Mattera, S., Jacob, R., & Morris, P. (2018). Strengthening children’s math skills with enhanced 
instruction: the impacts of Making Pre-K Count and High 5s on kindergarten outcomes 
(SSRN Scholarly Paper No. 3167484). https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3167484 
Mattera, S. K., Jacob, R., MacDowell, C., & Morris, P. A. (2021). Long-term effects of enhanced 
early childhood math instruction: the impacts of Making Pre-K Count and High 5s on 
third-grade outcomes. In MDRC. MDRC. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED616510 
Maxwell, B., Connolly, P., Demack, S., O’Hare, L., Stevens, A., & Clague, L. (2014). Textnow 
transition programme: Evaluation report and executive summary. In Education 
Endowment Foundation. Education Endowment Foundation. 
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED581131 
May, H., Goldsworthy, H., Armijo, M., Gray, A. M., Sirinides, P., Blalock, T. J., Anderson-
Clark, H., Schiera, A. J., Blackman, H., Gillespie, J., & Sam, C. (2014). Evaluation of the 
i3 scale-up of Reading Recovery | Year two report, 2012-13 [CPRE Research Reports]. 
University of Pennsylvania Consortium for Policy Research in Education. 
May, H., Gray, A., Sirinides, P., Goldsworthy, H., Armijo, M., Sam, C., Gillespie, J. N., & 
Tognatta, N. (2015). Year one results from the multisite randomized evaluation of the i3 
scale-up of reading recovery. American Educational Research Journal, 52(3), 547–581. 
https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831214565788 
Mayfield, L. (2000). The effects of structured one-on-one tutoring in sight word recognition of 
first-grade students at-risk for reading failure [Louisiana Tech University]. 
https://digitalcommons.latech.edu/dissertations/185 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
76 
76 
McCleary, E. K. (1971). Report of results of Tutorial Reading Project. The Reading Teacher, 
24(6), 556–559. 
McKinney, A. D. (1995). The effects of an after school tutorial and enrichment program on the 
academic achievement and self-concept of below grade level first and second-grade 
students. The University of Mississippi. 
Menesses, K. F., & Gresham, F. M. (2009). Relative efficacy of reciprocal and nonreciprocal 
peer tutoring for students at-risk for academic failure. School Psychology Quarterly, 
24(4), 266–275. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0018174 
Merrell, C., & Kasim, A. (2015). Butterfly Phonics: Evaluation report and executive summary. 
In Education Endowment Foundation. Education Endowment Foundation. 
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED581118 
Miller, S., & Connolly, P. (2013). A randomized controlled trial evaluation of Time to Read, a 
volunteer tutoring program for 8- to 9-year-olds. Educational Evaluation and Policy 
Analysis, 35(1), 23–37. 
Miller, S., Connolly, P., & Maguire, L. K. (2012). The effects of a volunteer mentoring 
programme on reading outcomes among eight- to nine-year-old children: A follow up 
randomized controlled trial. Journal of Early Childhood Research, 10(2), 134–144. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1476718X11407989 
Mooney, P. J. (2003). An investigation of the effects of a comprehensive reading intervention on 
the beginning reading skills of first graders at risk for emotional and behavioral 
disorders [Ph.D., The University of Nebraska - Lincoln]. 
https://www.proquest.com/docview/305310607/abstract/AE7141CF198343FDPQ/1 
Moran, A. S., Swanson, H. L., Gerber, M. M., & Fung, W. (2014). The effects of paraphrasing 
interventions on problem-solving accuracy for children at risk for math disabilities. 
Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 29(3), 97–105. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/ldrp.12035 
Morris, D., Shaw, B., & Perney, J. (1990). Helping low readers in grades 2 and 3: An after-
school volunteer tutoring program. The Elementary School Journal, 91(2), 133–150. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/461642 
Moser Opitz, E., Freesemann, O., Prediger, S., Grob, U., Matull, I., & Hußmann, S. (2017). 
Remediation for students with mathematics difficulties: An intervention study in middle 
schools. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 50(6), 724–736. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0022219416668323 
Murdaugh, D. L., Maximo, J. O., Cordes, C. E., O’Kelley, S. E., & Kana, R. K. (2017). From 
word reading to multisentence comprehension: Improvements in brain activity in children 
with autism after reading intervention. NeuroImage: Clinical, 16, 303–312. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2017.08.012 
Nelson, R. J., Benner, G. J., & Gonzalez, J. (2005). An investigation of the effects of a 
prereading intervention on the early literacy skills of children at risk of emotional 
disturbance and reading problems. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 
13(1), 3–12. https://doi.org/10.1177/10634266050130010101 
Nielsen, D. C., & Friesen, L. D. (2012). A study of the effectiveness of a small-group 
intervention on the vocabulary and narrative development of at-risk kindergarten 
children. Reading Psychology, 33(3), 269–299. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02702711.2010.508671 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
77 
77 
Nielson, B. B. (1991). Effects of parent and volunteer tutoring on reading achievement of third 
grade at-risk students. Brigham Young University. 
Nunes, T., Barros, R., Evangelou, M., Strand, S., Mathers, S., & Sanders-Ellis, D. (2018). 
1stClass@Number Evaluation report and executive summary. Education Endowment 
Foundation. 
Nunes, T., Bryant, P., & Olsson, J. (2003). Learning morphological and phonological spelling 
rules: An intervention study. Scientific Studies of Reading, 7(3), 289–307. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/S1532799XSSR0703_6 
Oakland, T., & Williams, F. C. (1975). An evaluation of two methods of peer tutoring. 
Psychology in the Schools, 12(2), 166–171. 
O’Connor, R. E., Bell, K. M., Harty, K. R., Larkin, L. K., Sackor, S. M., & Zigmond, N. (2002). 
Teaching reading to poor readers in the intermediate grades: A comparison of text 
difficulty. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94(3), 474–485. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.94.3.474 
O’Connor, R. E., Bocian, K., Beebe-Frankenberger, M., & Linklater, D. L. (2010). 
Responsiveness of students with language difficulties to early intervention in reading. 
The Journal of Special Education, 43(4), 220–235. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0022466908317789 
O’Connor, R. E., Swanson, H. L., & Geraghty, C. (2010). Improvement in reading rate under 
independent and difficult text levels: Influences on word and comprehension skills. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 102(1), 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0017488 
Oostdam, R., Blok, H., & Boendermaker, C. (2015). Effects of individualised and small-group 
guided oral reading interventions on reading skills and reading attitude of poor readers in 
grades 2–4. Research Papers in Education, 30(4), 427–450. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02671522.2014.953195 
Paramore, B., Plantec, P., & Hospodar, J. (1973). Project Upswing after two years: An 
evaluation (TR-801). Operations Research, Inc. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED099820 
Parham, J. W. (1993). An analysis of the effects of tutoring on seventh-grade students engaged in 
the mastery of pre-algebra concepts. University of Maryland College Park. 
Parker, D. C., Nelson, P. M., Zaslofsky, A. F., Kanive, R., Foegen, A., Kaiser, P., & Heisted, D. 
(2019). Evaluation of a math intervention program implemented with community 
support. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 12(3), 391–412. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/19345747.2019.1571653 
Patton, S. A., Fuchs, D., Hendricks, E. L., Pennell, A. J., Walsh, M. E., Fuchs, L. S., Tracy, W. 
Z., & Haga, L. Y. (2022). An experimental study to strengthen students’ comprehension 
of informational texts: Is teaching for transfer important? Learning Disabilities Research 
& Practice, 37(2), 124–139. https://doi.org/10.1111/ldrp.12276 
Peng, P., & Fuchs, D. (2017). A randomized control trial of working memory training with and 
without strategy instruction: Effects on young children’s working memory and 
comprehension. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 50(1), 62–80. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0022219415594609 
Pericola Case, L., Speece, D. L., Silverman, R., Ritchey, K. D., Schatschneider, C., Cooper, D. 
H., Montanaro, E., & Jacobs, D. (2010). Validation of a supplemental reading 
intervention for first-grade children. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 43(5), 402–417. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0022219409355475 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
78 
78 
Pinnell, G. S., Lyons, C. A., DeFord, D. E., Bryk, A. S., & Seltzer, M. (1994). Comparing 
instructional models for the literacy education of high-risk first graders. Reading 
Research Quarterly, 29(1), 9–39. https://doi.org/10.2307/747736 
Powell, S. R., Berry, K. A., Acunto, A. N., Fall, A.-M., & Roberts, G. (2022). Applying an 
individual word-problem intervention to a small-group setting: A pilot study’s evidence 
of improved word-problem performance for students experiencing mathematics 
difficulty. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 55(5), 359–374. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/00222194211047635 
Powell, S. R., & Driver, M. K. (2015). The influence of mathematics vocabulary instruction 
embedded within addition tutoring for first-grade students with mathematics difficulty. 
Learning Disability Quarterly, 38(4), 221–233. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0731948714564574 
Powell, S. R., Driver, M. K., & Julian, T. E. (2015). The effect of tutoring with nonstandard 
equations for students with mathematics difficulty. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 
48(5), 523–534. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022219413512613 
Powell, S. R., & Fuchs, L. S. (2010). Contribution of equal-sign instruction beyond word-
problem tutoring for third-grade students with mathematics difficulty. Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 102(2), 381–394. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0018447 
Powell, S. R., Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Cirino, P. T., & Fletcher, J. M. (2009). Effects of fact 
retrieval tutoring on third-grade students with math difficulties with and without reading 
difficulties. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 24(1), 1–11. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5826.2008.01272.x 
Powell, S. R., Stevens, E. A., & Berry, K. A. (2019). Effects of a word-problem intervention on 
word-problem language features for third-grade students with mathematics difficulty. 
Learning Disabilities: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 24(2), 1–14. 
https://doi.org/10.18666/LDMJ-2019-V24-I2-9835 
Pullen, P. C., & Lane, H. B. (2014). Teacher-directed decoding practice with manipulative letters 
and word reading skill development of struggling first grade students. Exceptionality, 
22(1), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1080/09362835.2014.865952 
Pullen, P. C., Lane, H. B., & Monaghan, M. C. (2004). Effects of a volunteer tutoring model on 
the early literacy development of struggling first grade students. Reading Research and 
Instruction, 43(4), 21–40. https://doi.org/10.1080/19388070409558415 
Ransford-Kaldon, C. R., Flynt, E. S., Ross, C. L., Franceschini, L., Zoblotsky, T., Huang, Y., & 
Gallagher, B. (2010). Implementation of effective intervention: An empirical study to 
evaluate the efficacy of Fountas & Pinnell’s Leveled Literacy Intervention system (LLI). 
2009-2010. Center for Research in Educational Policy (CREP). 
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ed544374 
Ransford-Kaldon, C. R., Ross, C. L., Lee, C. C., Flynt, E. S., Franceschini, L., & Zoblotsky, T. 
(2013). Efficacy of the leveled literacy intervention system for K-2 urban students: An 
empirical evaluation of LLI in Denver Public Schools. Center for Research in Education 
Policy. 
Rashotte, C. A., MacPhee, K., & Torgesen, J. K. (2001). The effectiveness of a group reading 
instruction program with poor readers in multiple grades. Learning Disability Quarterly, 
24(2), 119–134. https://doi.org/10.2307/1511068 
Rebok, G. W., Carlson, M. C., Glass, T. A., McGill, S., Hill, J., Wasik, B. A., Ialongo, N., Frick, 
K. D., Fried, L. P., & Rasmussen, M. D. (2004). Short-term impact of experience Corps® 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
79 
79 
participation on children and schools: Results from a pilot randomized trial. Journal of 
Urban Health, 81(1), 79–93. https://doi.org/10.1093/jurban/jth095 
Reynolds, D. (2021). Scaffolding the academic language of complex text: an intervention for late 
secondary students. Journal of Research in Reading, 44(3), 508–528. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9817.12353 
Rimm‐Kaufman, S. E., Kagan, J., & Byers, H. (1998). The effectiveness of adult volunteer 
tutoring on reading among “at risk” first grade children. Reading Research and 
Instruction, 38(2), 143–152. https://doi.org/10.1080/19388079909558284 
Ritchey, K. D., Silverman, R. D., Montanaro, E. A., Speece, D. L., & Schatschneider, C. (2012). 
Effects of a tier 2 supplemental reading intervention for at-risk fourth-grade students. 
Exceptional Children, 78(3), 318–334. https://doi.org/10.1177/001440291207800304 
Ritter, G., & Maynard, R. (2008). Using the right design to get the ‘wrong’ answer? Results of a 
random assignment evaluation of a volunteer tutoring programme. Journal of Children’s 
Services, 3(2), 4–16. https://doi.org/10.1108/17466660200800008 
Roach, J. C., Paolucci-Whitcomb, P., Meyers, H. W., & Duncan, D. A. (1983). The comparative 
effects of peer tutoring in math by and for secondary special needs students. Pointer, 
27(4), 20–24. 
Roberts, G. J., Capin, P., Roberts, G., Miciak, J., Quinn, J. M., & Vaughn, S. (2018). Examining 
the effects of afterschool reading interventions for upper elementary struggling readers. 
Remedial and Special Education, 39(3), 131–143. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0741932517750818 
Rogers, J. M. (1979). The effects of tutoring by sixth graders on the reading performance of first 
graders. [Educat.D., University of San Francisco]. 
https://www.proquest.com/docview/303035491/citation/83642FE214984B85PQ/1 
Rolfhus, E., Gersten, R., Clarke, B., Decker, L. E., Wilkins, C., & Dimino, J. (2012). An 
evaluation of “Number Rockets”: A tier-2 intervention for grade 1 students at risk for 
difficulties in mathematics. Final report. In National Center for Education Evaluation 
and Regional Assistance (No. 2012–4007). National Center for Education Evaluation and 
Regional Assistance. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED529429 
Roschelle, J., Cheng, B. H., Hodkowski, N., Neisler, J., & Haldar, L. (2020). Evaluation of an 
online tutoring program in elementary mathematics. In Online Submission. Digital 
Promise. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED604743 
Rosenshine, B., Mattleman, M., & Rosenshine, B. (1971). Remediation in reading for fourth 
graders: A project report for 1969-70. Philadelphia School District. 
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED053879 
Rutt, S., Kettlewell, K., & Bernardinelli, D. (2015). Catch Up® Literacy: Evaluation report and 
executive summary. In National Foundation for Educational Research. National 
Foundation for Educational Research. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED558735 
Ryder, J. F., Tunmer, W. E., & Greaney, K. T. (2008). Explicit instruction in phonemic 
awareness and phonemically based decoding skills as an intervention strategy for 
struggling readers in whole language classrooms. Reading and Writing, 21(4), 349–369. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-007-9080-z 
Scanlon, D. M., Vellutino, F. R., Small, S. G., Fanuele, D. P., & Sweeney, J. M. (2005). Severe 
reading difficulties—can they be prevented? A comparison of prevention and 
intervention approaches. Exceptionality, 13(4), 209–227. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327035ex1304_3 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
80 
80 
Schwartz, R. M. (2005). Literacy learning of at-risk first-grade students in the Reading Recovery 
early intervention. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97(2), 257–267. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.97.2.257 
See, B. H., Morris, R., Gorard, S., & Siddiqui, N. (2019). Evaluation of the impact of Maths 
Counts delivered by teaching assistants on primary school pupils’ attainment in maths. 
Educational Research and Evaluation, 25(3–4), 203–224. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13803611.2019.1686031 
Sharma, M., Purdy, S. C., & Kelly, A. S. (2012). A randomized control trial of interventions in 
school-aged children with auditory processing disorders. International Journal of 
Audiology, 51(7), 506–518. https://doi.org/10.3109/14992027.2012.670272 
Sibieta, L., Kotecha, M., & Skipp, A. (2016). Nuffield Early Language Intervention: Evaluation 
report and executive summary. Education Endowment Foundation. 
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED581138 
Sirinides, P., Gray, A., & May, H. (2018). The impacts of reading recovery at scale: Results from 
the 4-year i3 external evaluation. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 40(3), 
316–335. https://doi.org/10.3102/0162373718764828 
Smith, S. B. (1996). An examination of the efficacy and the efficiency of phonological awareness 
instruction for prereaders at-risk of reading failure. Final report [University of Oregon]. 
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED421805 
Smith, T. M., Cobb, P., Farran, D. C., Cordray, D. S., & Munter, C. (2013). Evaluating math 
recovery: Assessing the causal impact of a diagnostic tutoring program on student 
achievement. American Educational Research Journal, 50(2), 397–428. 
https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831212469045 
Solari, E. J., Denton, C. A., Petscher, Y., & Haring, C. (2018). Examining the effects and 
feasibility of a teacher-implemented tier 1 and tier 2 intervention in word reading, 
fluency, and comprehension. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 11(2), 
163–191. https://doi.org/10.1080/19345747.2017.1375582 
Solís, M., Scammacca, N., Barth, A. E., & Roberts, G. J. (2017). Text-based vocabulary 
intervention training study: Supporting fourth graders with low reading comprehension 
and learning disabilities. Learning Disabilities (Weston, Mass.), 15(1), 103–115. 
Solis, M., Vaughn, S., Stillman-Spisak, S. J., & Cho, E. (2018). Effects of reading 
comprehension and vocabulary intervention on comprehension-related outcomes for 
ninth graders with low reading comprehension. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 34(6), 
537–553. https://doi.org/10.1080/10573569.2018.1499059 
Swanson, H. L. (2015). Cognitive strategy interventions improve word problem solving and 
working memory in children with math disabilities. Frontiers in Psychology, 6. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01099 
Swanson, H. L., Kong, J. E., Moran, A. S., & Orosco, M. J. (2019). Paraphrasing interventions 
and problem‐solving accuracy: Do generative procedures help english language learners 
with math difficulties? Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 34(2), 68–84. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/ldrp.12194 
Swanson, H. L., Moran, A., Lussier, C., & Fung, W. (2014). The effect of explicit and direct 
generative strategy training and working memory on word problem-solving accuracy in 
children at risk for math difficulties. Learning Disability Quarterly, 37(2), 111–123. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0731948713507264 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
81 
81 
Swanson, H. L., Orosco, M. J., & Lussier, C. M. (2014). The effects of mathematics strategy 
instruction for children with serious problem-solving difficulties. Exceptional Children, 
80(2), 149–168. https://doi.org/10.1177/001440291408000202 
Thurmann-Moe, A. C., Melby-Lervåg, M., & Lervåg, A. (2022). Effects of articulatory 
consciousness training in first graders with a reading delay: A randomised control trial. 
Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 66(3), 473–490. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00313831.2020.1869823 
Thurston, A., Cockerill, M., & Chiang, T.-H. (2021). Assessing the differential effects of peer 
tutoring for tutors and tutees. Education Sciences, 11(3), 97. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci11030097 
Thurston, A., Cockerill, M., & Craig, N. (2019). Using cooperative learning to close the reading 
attainment gap for students with low literacy levels for Grade 8/Year 9 students. 
International Journal of Educational Research, 94, 1–10. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2019.02.016 
Tolan, P., Gorman-Smith, D., & Henry, D. (2004). Supporting families in a high-risk setting: 
Proximal effects of the SAFEChildren preventive intervention. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 72(5), 855–869. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.72.5.855 
Torgerson, C., Ainsworth, H., Buckley, H., Hampden-Thompson, G., Hewitt, C., Humphry, D., 
Jefferson, L., Mitchell, N., & Torgerson, D. (2016). Affordable online maths tuition: 
Evaluation report and executive summary. In Education Endowment Foundation. 
Education Endowment Foundation. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED581116 
Torgerson, C., Bell, K., Coleman, E., Elliot, L., Fairhurst, C., Gascione, L., Hewitt, C. E., & 
Torgerson, D. (2018). Tutor Trust: Affordable primary tuition evaluation report and 
executive summary November 2018. Education Endowment Foundation. 
Torgerson, C., Wiggins, A., Torgerson, D., Ainsworth, H., & Hewitt, C. (2013). Every Child 
Counts : testing policy effectiveness using a randomised controlled trial, designed, 
conducted and reported to CONSORT standards. Research in Mathematics Education, 
15(2), 141–153. https://doi.org/10.1080/14794802.2013.797746 
Torgesen, J. K., Wagner, R. K., Rashotte, C. A., Herron, J., & Lindamood, P. (2010). Computer-
assisted instruction to prevent early reading difficulties in students at risk for dyslexia: 
Outcomes from two instructional approaches. Annals of Dyslexia, 60(1), 40–56. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11881-009-0032-y 
Torgesen, J. K., Wagner, R. K., Rashotte, C. A., Rose, E., Lindamood, P., Conway, T., & 
Garvan, C. (1999). Preventing reading failure in young children with phonological 
processing disabilities: Group and individual responses to instruction. Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 91(4), 579–593. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.91.4.579 
Torgesen, J., Myers, D., Schirm, A., Stuart, E. A., Vartivarian, S., Mansfield, W., Stancavage, F., 
Durno, D., Javorsky, R., & Haan, C. (2006). Closing the reading gap: First year findings 
from a randomized trial of four reading interventions for striving readers 
(0f5955350f2f4dc6bd83a19896ba3472; Mathematica Policy Research Reports). 
Mathematica Policy Research. 
https://ideas.repec.org//p/mpr/mprres/0f5955350f2f4dc6bd83a19896ba3472.html 
Torgesen, J., Schirm, A., Castner, L., Vartivarian, S., Mansfield, W., Myers, D., Stancavage, F., 
Durno, D., Javorsky, R., & Haan, C. (2007). National assessment of Title I. Final report. 
Volume II: Closing the reading gap--findings from a randomized trial of four reading 
interventions for striving readers. In National Center for Education Evaluation and 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
82 
82 
Regional Assistance (No. 2008–4013). National Center for Education Evaluation and 
Regional Assistance. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED499018 
Toste, J. R., Capin, P., Vaughn, S., Roberts, G. J., & Kearns, D. M. (2017). Multisyllabic word-
reading instruction with and without motivational beliefs training for struggling readers 
in the upper elementary grades: A pilot investigation. The Elementary School Journal, 
117(4), 593–615. https://doi.org/10.1086/691684 
Toste, J. R., Capin, P., Williams, K. J., Cho, E., & Vaughn, S. (2019). Replication of an 
experimental study investigating the efficacy of a multisyllabic word reading intervention 
with and without motivational beliefs training for struggling readers. Journal of Learning 
Disabilities, 52(1), 45–58. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022219418775114 
Tournaki, N. (2003). The differential effects of teaching addition through strategy instruction 
versus drill and practice to students with and without learning disabilities. Journal of 
Learning Disabilities, 36(5), 449–458. https://doi.org/10.1177/00222194030360050601 
Vadasy, P. F., Jenkins, J. R., Antil, L. R., Wayne, S. K., & O’Connor, R. E. (1997a). 
Community-based early reading intervention for at-risk first graders. Learning 
Disabilities Research & Practice, 12(1), 29–39. 
Vadasy, P. F., Jenkins, J. R., Antil, L. R., Wayne, S. K., & O’Connor, R. E. (1997b). The 
effectiveness of one-to-one tutoring by community tutors for at-risk beginning readers. 
Learning Disability Quarterly, 20(2), 126–139. https://doi.org/10.2307/1511219 
Vadasy, P. F., Jenkins, J. R., & Pool, K. (2000). Effects of tutoring in phonological and early 
reading skills on students at risk for reading disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 
33(6), 579–590. https://doi.org/10.1177/002221940003300606 
Vadasy, P. F., & Sanders, E. A. (2008a). Repeated reading intervention: Outcomes and 
interactions with readers’ skills and classroom instruction. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 100(2), 272–290. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.100.2.272 
Vadasy, P. F., & Sanders, E. A. (2008b). Benefits of repeated reading intervention for low-
achieving fourth- and fifth-grade students. Remedial and Special Education, 29(4), 235–
249. https://doi.org/10.1177/0741932507312013 
Vadasy, P. F., & Sanders, E. A. (2008c). Code-oriented instruction for kindergarten students at 
risk for reading difficulties: a replication and comparison of instructional groupings. 
Reading and Writing, 21(9), 929–963. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-008-9119-9 
Vadasy, P. F., & Sanders, E. A. (2009). Supplemental fluency intervention and determinants of 
reading outcomes. Scientific Studies of Reading, 13(5), 383–425. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10888430903162894 
Vadasy, P. F., & Sanders, E. A. (2010). Efficacy of supplemental phonics-based instruction for 
low-skilled kindergarteners in the context of language minority status and classroom 
phonics instruction. Journal of Educational Psychology, 102(4), 786–803. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0019639 
Vadasy, P. F., & Sanders, E. A. (2011). Efficacy of supplemental phonics-based instruction for 
low-skilled first graders: How language minority status and pretest characteristics 
moderate treatment response. Scientific Studies of Reading, 15(6), 471–497. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10888438.2010.501091 
Vadasy, P. F., & Sanders, E. A. (2012). Two-year follow-up of a kindergarten phonics 
intervention for English learners and native English speakers: Contextualizing treatment 
impacts by classroom literacy instruction. Journal of Educational Psychology, 104(4), 
987–1005. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0028163 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
83 
83 
Vadasy, P. F., & Sanders, E. A. (2013). Two-year follow-up of a code-oriented intervention for 
lower-skilled first-graders: The influence of language status and word reading skills on 
third-grade literacy outcomes. Reading and Writing, 26(6), 821–843. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-012-9393-4 
Vadasy, P. F., Sanders, E. A., & Peyton, J. A. (2006a). Code-oriented instruction for 
kindergarten students at risk for reading difficulties: A randomized field trial with 
paraeducator implementers. Journal of Educational Psychology, 98(3), 508–528. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.98.3.508 
Vadasy, P. F., Sanders, E. A., & Peyton, J. A. (2006b). Paraeducator-supplemented instruction in 
structural analysis with text reading practice for second and third graders at risk for 
reading problems. Remedial and Special Education, 27(6), 365–378. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/07419325060270060601 
Vadasy, P. F., Sanders, E. A., & Tudor, S. (2007). Effectiveness of paraeducator-supplemented 
individual instruction: Beyond basic decoding skills. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 
40(6), 508–525. https://doi.org/10.1177/00222194070400060301 
Van Luit, J. E. H., & Naglieri, J. A. (1999). Effectiveness of the MASTER Program for teaching 
special children multiplication and division. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 32(2), 98–
107. https://doi.org/10.1177/002221949903200201 
Vaughn, S., Cirino, P. T., Linan-Thompson, S., Mathes, P. G., Carlson, C. D., Hagan, E. C., 
Pollard-Durodola, S. D., Fletcher, J. M., & Francis, D. J. (2006). Effectiveness of a 
Spanish intervention and an English intervention for English-language learners at risk for 
reading problems. American Educational Research Journal, 43(3), 449–487. 
https://doi.org/10.3102/00028312043003449 
Vaughn, S., Linan-Thompson, S., Mathes, P. G., Cirino, P. T., Carlson, C. D., Pollard-Durodola, 
S. D., Cardenas-Hagan, E., & Francis, D. J. (2006). Effectiveness of Spanish intervention 
for first-grade English language learners at risk for reading difficulties. Journal of 
Learning Disabilities, 39(1), 56–73. https://doi.org/10.1177/00222194060390010601 
Vaughn, S., Mathes, P., Linan‐Thompson, S., Cirino, P., Carlson, C., Pollard‐Durodola, S., 
Cardenas‐Hagan, E., & Francis, D. (2006). Effectiveness of an English intervention for 
first‐grade English language learners at risk for reading problems. The Elementary School 
Journal, 107(2), 153–180. https://doi.org/10.1086/510653 
Vaughn, S., Roberts, G. J., Miciak, J., Taylor, P., & Fletcher, J. M. (2019). Efficacy of a word- 
and text-based intervention for students with significant reading difficulties. Journal of 
Learning Disabilities, 52(1), 31–44. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022219418775113 
Vaughn, S., Wanzek, J., Wexler, J., Barth, A., Cirino, P. T., Fletcher, J., Romain, M., Denton, C. 
A., Roberts, G., & Francis, D. (2010). The relative effects of group size on reading 
progress of older students with reading difficulties. Reading and Writing, 23(8), 931–956. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11145-009-9183-9 
Vernon-Feagans, L., Kainz, K., Hedrick, A., Ginsberg, M., & Amendum, S. (2010). The targeted 
reading intervention: A classroom teacher professional development program to promote 
effective teaching for struggling readers in kindergarten and first grade. In Society for 
Research on Educational Effectiveness. Society for Research on Educational 
Effectiveness. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED512686 
Villiger, C., Hauri, S., Tettenborn, A., Hartmann, E., Näpflin, C., Hugener, I., & Niggli, A. 
(2019). Effectiveness of an extracurricular program for struggling readers: A comparative 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
84 
84 
study with parent tutors and volunteer tutors. Learning and Instruction, 60, 54–65. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2018.11.004 
Vousden, J. I., Cunningham, A. J., Johnson, H., Waldron, S., Ammi, S., Pillinger, C., Savage, R., 
& Wood, C. (2022). Decoding and comprehension skills mediate the link between a 
small‐group reading programme and English national literacy assessments. British 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(1), 105–130. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjep.12441 
Walsh, M. E. (2020). Developing an informational text comprehension intervention for 
struggling readers in third grade [Ph.D., Vanderbilt University]. 
https://www.proquest.com/docview/2440672823/abstract/3EF0E56DA75C4F62PQ/1 
Wanzek, J., Otaiba, S. A., Schatschneider, C., Donegan, R. E., Rivas, B., Jones, F., & Petscher, 
Y. (2020). Intensive intervention for upper elementary students with severe reading 
comprehension difficulties. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 13(3), 
408–429. https://doi.org/10.1080/19345747.2019.1710886 
Wanzek, J., Petscher, Y., Otaiba, S. A., Rivas, B. K., Jones, F. G., Kent, S. C., Schatschneider, 
C., & Mehta, P. (2017). Effects of a year long supplemental reading intervention for 
students with reading difficulties in fourth grade. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
109(8), 1103–1119. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000184 
Wanzek, J., & Roberts, G. (2012). Reading interventions with varying instructional emphases for 
fourth graders with reading difficulties. Learning Disability Quarterly, 35(2), 90–101. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0731948711434047 
Wanzek, J., & Vaughn, S. (2008). Response to varying amounts of time in reading intervention 
for students with low response to intervention. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 41(2), 
126–142. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022219407313426 
Wexler, J., Vaughn, S., Roberts, G., & Denton, C. A. (2010). The efficacy of Repeated Reading 
and Wide Reading Practice for high school students with severe reading disabilities. 
Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 25(1), 2–10. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-
5826.2009.00296.x 
White, J. R. (2000). A study of the effectiveness of using volunteer tutors in a corrective reading 
program. Old Dominion University. 
White, M. M. (2012). Repeated reading of core text: A study of reading fluency among below-
level readers [Ph.D., Capella University]. 
https://www.proquest.com/docview/945731824/abstract/542E539E61834B69PQ/1 
Wilkerson, S. B. (2008). A study of Pearson’s My Sidewalks Program: Final report. Magnolia 
Consulting. 
Wolff, U. (2011). Effects of a randomised reading intervention study: An application of 
structural equation modelling. Dyslexia, 17(4), 295–311. https://doi.org/10.1002/dys.438 
Woo, D. G. (2005). America Reads: The effects of a federal work -study tutoring program on 
literacy achievement and attitudes of teachers, tutors, and children [Ed.D., Rutgers The 
State University of New Jersey, School of Graduate Studies]. 
https://www.proquest.com/docview/305396827/abstract/58FC4F3254EF4E39PQ/1 
Wright, H., Dorsett, R., Anders, J., Buzzeo, J., Runge, J., & Sanders, M. (2019). Improving 
Working Memory: Evaluation report and executive summary. In The Education 
Endowment Foundation (EEF): London, UK. [Report]. The Education Endowment 
Foundation (EEF). 
https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/public/files/Projects/Evaluation_Reports/I
mproving_Working_Memory_Report_final.pdf 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
85 
85 
Young, C., Pearce, D., Gomez, J., Christensen, R., Pletcher, B., & Fleming, K. (2018). Read 
Two Impress and the Neurological Impress Method: Effects on elementary students’ 
reading fluency, comprehension, and attitude. The Journal of Educational Research, 
111(6), 657–665. https://doi.org/10.1080/00220671.2017.1393650 
Zinn, A., & Courtney, M. E. (2014). Context matters: Experimental evaluation of home-based 
tutoring for youth in foster care. Children and Youth Services Review, 47, 198–204. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.childyouth.2014.08.017 
Zvoch, K. (2019). Investigation of the long term effect of a summer literacy program on student 
reading performance. Studies in Educational Evaluation, 62, 111–117. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stueduc.2019.05.005 
 
 
 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
86 
86 
Appendix B. Additional Tables and Figures 
 
Table B1. Trim and fill estimates, stacked subjects 
Effect-level estimates 
  
Study-by-subject-level estimates 
Observed 
Observed and 
imputed 
  
Observed 
Observed and 
imputed 
(1) 
(2) 
  
(3) 
(4) 
Panel A. Full sample 
0.444*** 
0.444*** 
  
0.348*** 
0.348*** 
(0.014) 
(0.014) 
  
(0.023) 
(0.023) 
2,223 
2,223 
  
277 
277 
Panel B. Studies with 0-99 treated students 
0.550*** 
0.550*** 
  
0.458*** 
0.458*** 
(0.021) 
(0.021) 
  
(0.039) 
(0.039) 
1,403 
1,403 
  
166 
166 
Panel C. Studies with ≥100 students 
0.289*** 
0.289*** 
  
0.239*** 
0.239*** 
(0.013) 
(0.013) 
  
(0.022) 
(0.022) 
820 
820 
  
111 
111 
Notes: *** p<0.10; ** p<0.05, * p<0.01. All estimates stack math and reading. Columns (1) and (2) 
report trim and fill estimate results on effect size level observations, while columns (3) and (4) report 
the same for observations collapsed to the study by subject area level. While Panel A conducts this 
estimation on the full sample, Panels B and C subdivide the sample into studies of programs serving 
less than and at least 100 tutored students, respectively. Columns (2) and (4) impute values if there are 
imbalances in the distribution of effects reported in columns (1) and (3), respectively. Note that if the 
distribution of effects was imbalanced around the average pooled estimate, the samples in columns (2) 
and (4) would include additional, imputed values that fill in the “gaps” of those distributions; observing 
no differences in these samples is evidence results are not meaningfully impacted by publication bias. 
 
 
Table B2. Estimates pooled by publication type 
No sample size 
restriction 
0-99 treated 
students 
100-399 treated 
students 
400-999 treated 
students 
≥1000 treated 
students 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
Panel A. Subsample of studies published in peer-reviewed journals 
0.454*** 
0.543*** 
0.340*** 
0.279*** 
0.325* 
(0.040) 
(0.064) 
(0.029) 
(0.048) 
(0.193) 
1940 
1288 
570 
67 
15 
Panel B. Subsample of studies not published in peer-reviewed journals 
0.220*** 
0.572*** 
0.150*** 
0.207*** 
0.085 
(0.056) 
(0.133) 
(0.029) 
(0.052) 
(0.064) 
283 
115 
70 
45 
53 
Notes: *** p<0.10; ** p<0.05, * p<0.01. Column (1) present the pooled meta-analytic average effect 
size estimate for the subsample of effects described by each panel. This estimate is disaggregated 
across treated student sample size in columns (2) through (5). Each panel isolates a single feature of 
tutoring program design that has been associated with elevated impacts in prior research. 

TUTORING META-ANALYSIS 
 
87 
87 
 
 
Table B3. Estimates pooled by best practices, stacked subjects 
No sample size 
restriction 
0-99 treated 
students 
100-399 treated 
students 
400-999 treated 
students 
≥1000 treated 
students 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
Panel A. Subsample of tutoring programs conducted in-person 
0.438*** 
0.545*** 
0.320*** 
0.253*** 
0.276** 
(0.036) 
(0.060) 
(0.026) 
(0.037) 
(0.118) 
2,164 
1,396 
630 
112 
26 
Panel B. Subsample of tutoring programs conducted at school 
0.404*** 
0.504*** 
0.318*** 
0.260*** 
0.138 
(0.030) 
(0.045) 
(0.030) 
(0.038) 
(0.103) 
1,885 
1,236 
473 
108 
68 
Panel C. Subsample of tutoring programs conducted during the school day 
0.388*** 
0.473*** 
0.324*** 
0.272*** 
0.147 
(0.027) 
(0.039) 
(0.028) 
(0.040) 
(0.125) 
1,748 
1,086 
496 
103 
63 
Panel D. Subsample of tutoring programs with student-tutor ratios of no more than 3:1 
0.400*** 
0.504*** 
0.327*** 
0.245*** 
0.147 
(0.030) 
(0.047) 
(0.028) 
(0.042) 
(0.129) 
1,665 
999 
531 
73 
62 
Panel E. Subsample of tutoring programs delivering ≥15 total hours of tutoring 
0.423*** 
0.523*** 
0.332*** 
0.254*** 
0.306*** 
(0.039) 
(0.070) 
(0.032) 
(0.042) 
(0.115) 
1,572 
1,003 
447 
92 
30 
Panel F. Subsample of tutoring programs using curricula for lessons 
0.410*** 
0.518*** 
0.330*** 
0.260*** 
0.055*** 
(0.036) 
(0.059) 
(0.027) 
(0.038) 
(0.008) 
2,011 
1,245 
602 
109 
55 
Panel G. Subsample of tutoring programs with ≥3 sessions per week 
0.411*** 
0.509*** 
0.348*** 
0.260*** 
0.150 
(0.030) 
(0.049) 
(0.026) 
(0.045) 
(0.135) 
1,805 
1,086 
573 
85 
61 
Notes: *** p<0.10; ** p<0.05, * p<0.01. Column (1) present the pooled meta-analytic average 
effect size estimate for the subsample of effects described by each panel. This estimate is 
disaggregated across treated student sample size in columns (2) through (5). Each panel isolates a 
single feature of tutoring program design that has been associated with elevated impacts in prior 
research. 
 
 
 
