   1 
PISA 2025 RESULTS (VOLUME I) – COUNTRY NOTES: ARGENTINA © OECD 2026 
  
The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) assesses the knowledge, skills and attitudes 
of 15-year-old students. The tests explore how well students can solve complex problems, think critically 
and communicate effectively; data collected through questionnaires describe the context in which students 
learn. This gives insights into how well education systems are preparing students for real life challenges 
and future success. Argentina participated for the first time in PISA in 2001. By comparing results 
internationally, policy makers and educators in Argentina can learn from other countries’ policies and 
practices. 
Fifteen-year-old students in Argentina and the context in which they learn 
Figure 1. A multi-dimensional dashboard of student learning 
 
 
Argentina 

2    
PISA 2025 RESULTS (VOLUME I) – COUNTRY NOTES: ARGENTINA © OECD 2026 
  
 
 
Notes: Due to missing data, not all countries and economies are included in every dimension. For each dimension, the top country/economy 
and the OECD average are highlighed; truancy values are sorted in descending order, so that values shown to the right correspond to lower 
levels of truancy. 
For indicators derived from students’ and principals’ reports, differences between countries and economies should be interpreted with caution, 
as they may reflect variations in response behaviour rather than true underlying differences. Non-response to questionnaires, cultural norms, as 
well as differing interpretations of questions can influence these indicators. 
Definitions: Values that are not reported as percentages correspond to mean values of the corresponding questionnaire indices. Percentages 
are defined as follows: Percentage of students scoring above a baseline level of proficiency: students scoring at or above Level 2 in science, 
mathematics and reading; at or above Level 3 in computational problem solving; Growth mindset: Percentage of students who disagree or 
strongly disagree with the statement “You have a certain amount of intelligence, and you really can’t do much to change it”; Value of learning at 
school: Percentage of students who disagree or strongly disagree that “School has done little to prepare me for adult life when I leave school”; 
Absence of bullying: Percentage of students who reported never or almost never being victim of any type of bullying act (among a list of five 
different types of acts); Truancy: Percentage of students who reported that in the two weeks prior to the PISA test they had skipped at least one 
class or day of school; Academic resilience in science: Percentage of students from the bottom quarter of socio-economic status (disadvantaged 
students) who scored in the top quarter of performance amongst students in their own country/economy; Beliefs in social mobility: Percentage 
of students who disagree or strongly disagree with the statement “Your status in society is something that you can’t really change very much”; 
No shortage of teaching staff: Percentage of students in schools whose principal reported that the school’s capacity to provide instruction is not 
at all hindered by a lack of teaching staff; Peer-to-peer tutoring: Percentage of students in schools whose principal reported that peer-to-peer 
tutoring is provided; Learning to assess AI-generated content in class: Percentage of students who reported that, in their school lessons, they 
assess the quality of information generated by Artificial Intelligence chatbots (e.g. ChatGPT) sometimes, often or very often; School policy: cell 
phone bans in school: Percentage of students in schools whose principal reported that the use of cell phones is not allowed on the school 
premises; School policy: subject-specific guidelines on digital devices: Percentage of students in schools whose principal reported that the 
school has formal guidelines for the use of digital devices for teaching and learning in specific subjects. 
Source: Figure I.1.2. 
An interactive dashboard is available at https://www.oecd.org/en/data/dashboards/pisa-education-and-skills.html 

   3 
PISA 2025 RESULTS (VOLUME I) – COUNTRY NOTES: ARGENTINA © OECD 2026 
  
Notes on data quality in PISA 2025 
This edition of PISA includes data from 91 countries and economies. While the vast majority of 
countries and economies met PISA’s technical standards, a small number did not. In particular, caution 
is required when interpreting results of countries and economies mentioned in this note with an asterisk 
(*) next to their names: their results could be affected by greater uncertainty, or even be biased, 
because one or more PISA sampling standards were not met. For more information, see the Reader’s 
Guide in PISA 2025 Results, Volume I and Chapter 18 (Data Adjudication) in the PISA 2025 Technical 
Report. 
In Argentina, all data met the quality standards set by PISA and were considered fit for reporting. 
How well did 15-year-old students in Argentina do on the test? 
Trends in science, mathematics and reading performance 
Figure 2. Trends in performance in science, mathematics and reading 
 
Note: White dots indicate mean scores that are not statistically significantly above/below PISA 2025 mean scores. An interactive version of this 
figure is available at https://www.oecd.org/en/data/dashboards/pisa-education-and-skills/performance-trends.html. 
Source: Tables I.B1.2a.36-38 
• 
Average 2025 results in Argentina were lower than in 2022 in mathematics, reading and science. 
• 
In all three subjects, results were also below 2018 scores. 
• 
Over the most recent period (2022 to 2025), the gap between the highest-scoring students 
(10% with the highest scores) and the weakest students (10% with the lowest scores) widened in 
mathematics and science, while it did not change significantly in reading. 
• 
Compared to 2018 the proportion of low-performing students (scoring below proficiency Level 2) 
increased by seven percentage points in mathematics; by seven percentage points in reading; and 
by six percentage points in science. 
How does Argentina compare? 
• 
Students in Argentina scored less than the OECD average in mathematics, reading and science 
(Figure 3). 
• 
A smaller proportion of students in Argentina than on average across OECD countries were top 
performers (Level 5 or 6) in at least one subject. At the same time, a smaller proportion of students 

4    
PISA 2025 RESULTS (VOLUME I) – COUNTRY NOTES: ARGENTINA © OECD 2026 
  
than on average across OECD countries achieved a minimum level of proficiency (Level 2 or 
higher) in all three subjects (Figure 4). 
• 
In computational problem solving, the mean score of students in Argentina was lower than the 
OECD average (Figure 3). 
Figure 3. Mean performance in science, mathematics, reading and computational problem solving 
Argentina, OECD average and selected comparison countries/economies 
 
Notes: Comparison countries/economies include the highest-performing countries and economies overall and the highest-performing OECD 
countries; for comparisons with all remaining PISA 2025 participants, see source Tables and Figures. Horizontal lines that extend beyond the 
markers represent a measure of uncertainty associated with mean scores (the 95% confidence interval). 
Source: Tables I.B1.2a.1-3 and Tables I.2.1, I.2.4, I.2.o1 and I.2.o2 

   5 
PISA 2025 RESULTS (VOLUME I) – COUNTRY NOTES: ARGENTINA © OECD 2026 
  
What students know and can do in science 
Figure 4. Proficiency in science, mathematics and reading among 15-year-old students 
Argentina and OECD average 
 
Source: Tables I.B1.2a.10-12 
• 
Some 41% of students in Argentina attained Level 2 or higher in science (OECD average: 74%). 
At a minimum, these students can recognize the correct explanation for familiar scientific 
phenomena and can use such knowledge to identify, in simple cases, whether a conclusion is valid 
based on the data provided. Over 85% of students in top performers B-S-J-Z (China), Macao 
(China), Singapore, Estonia, Japan, Chinese Taipei and Korea (in descending order of that share) 
performed at this level or above. 
• 
In Argentina, 1% of students were top performers in science, meaning that they were proficient at 
Level 5 or 6 (OECD average: 7%). These students can creatively and autonomously apply their 
knowledge of and about science to a wide variety of situations, including unfamiliar ones. 
What students know and can do in mathematics 
• 
In Argentina, 24% of students attained at least Level 2 proficiency in mathematics (OECD average: 
65%). At a minimum, these students can interpret and recognize, without direct instructions, how 
a simple situation can be represented mathematically (e.g. comparing the total distance across two 
alternative routes, or converting prices into a different currency). 
• 
Almost no students in Argentina were top performers in mathematics, meaning that they attained 
Level 5 or 6 in the PISA mathematics test (OECD average: 8%). The largest shares of students 
attaining Level 5 or 6 were observed in Seven Asian countries and economies: B-S-J-Z (China) 
(54%), Singapore (37%), Chinese Taipei (32%), Macao (China) (29%), Korea (23%), Japan (22%) 
and Hong Kong (China) (21%). At these levels, students can model complex situations 
mathematically, and can select, compare and evaluate appropriate problem-solving strategies for 
dealing with them. In 13 countries and economies participating in PISA 2025, more than 10% of 
students attained Level 5 or 6 proficiency. 

6    
PISA 2025 RESULTS (VOLUME I) – COUNTRY NOTES: ARGENTINA © OECD 2026 
  
What students know and can do in reading 
• 
Some 40% of students in Argentina attained Level 2 or higher in reading (OECD average: 69%). 
At a minimum, these students can identify the main idea in a text of moderate length, find 
information based on explicit, though sometimes complex criteria, and can reflect on the purpose 
and form of texts when explicitly directed to do so. The share of 15-year-old students who attained 
minimum levels of proficiency in reading (Level 2 or higher) varied from 93% in B-S-J-Z (China) to 
4% in Rwanda. 
• 
In Argentina, 1% of students scored at Level 5 or higher in reading (OECD average: 6%). These 
students can comprehend lengthy texts, deal with concepts that are abstract or counterintuitive, 
and establish distinctions between fact and opinion, based on implicit cues pertaining to the content 
or source of the information. 
Performance gaps within Argentina 
Figure 5. Science performance and socio-economic status of students and schools 
 
Source: Tables I.B1.2b.7 and Table I.B1.2b.11; and OECD, PISA 2025 Database. 
Notes: The left-hand chart shows how the performance of students at different levels of socio-economic status compares to the performance of 
students with similar socio-economic background across OECD countries on average. The shaded area represents a measure of uncertainty 
(the 95% confidence interval). Percentages reported on the chart correspond to the percentage of students in Argentina that are in each 
international quartile of socio-economic status. 
The right-hand chart plots the performance and average socio-economic status of schools that participated in PISA (only schools with students 
in the modal grade for 15-year-olds are shown). The size of dots is proportional to the population of 15-year-old students that each school 
represents. 
Socio-economic disparities 
• 
The PISA index of economic, social and cultural status is computed in such a way that all students 
taking the PISA test, regardless of the country where they live, can be placed on the same socio-
economic scale. This means that it is possible to use this index to compare the performance of 
students of similar socio-economic background in different countries. In Argentina, 33% of students 

   7 
PISA 2025 RESULTS (VOLUME I) – COUNTRY NOTES: ARGENTINA © OECD 2026 
  
(the largest share) were in the 2nd international quartile of the socio-economic scale, meaning that 
they were neither among the most disadvantaged, nor among the most advantaged students who 
took the PISA test in 2025. Their average score in science was 379 score points (Figure 5, left 
chart). In B-S-J-Z (China) and Türkiye, students of similar socio-economic background tend to 
score significantly higher. 
• 
The PISA index of economic, social and cultural status can also be used to order students from 
the most disadvantaged to the most advantaged within each country and economy, and to create 
four groups of students of equal size (each comprising 25% of the population of 15-year-old 
students in each country/economy). In Argentina socio-economically advantaged students (the top 
25% in terms of socio-economic status) outperformed disadvantaged students (the bottom 25%) 
by 82 score points in science. This is similar to the average difference between the two groups 
(85 score points) across OECD countries. 
• 
Between 2018 and 2025, the gap in science performance between the top and the bottom 25% of 
students in terms of socio-economic status remained stable in Argentina, as well as across OECD 
countries on average. Over this period, performance remained stable both among advantaged and 
disadvantaged students. 
• 
Socio-economic status was a predictor of performance in science in all PISA-participating countries 
and economies. It accounted for 12% of the variation in science performance in PISA 2025 in 
Argentina (compared to 12% on average across OECD countries). 
• 
Some 14% of disadvantaged students in Argentina were able to score in the top quarter of science 
performance. These students can be considered academically resilient because, despite their 
socio-economic disadvantage, they have attained educational excellence by comparison with 
students in their own country. On average across OECD countries, 12% of disadvantaged students 
scored in the top quarter of science performance in their own countries. 
Student attitudes towards school and learning in Argentina 
Student curiosity, perseverance and perceived value of school 
• 
In Argentina, 59% of students agree or strongly agree that they are curious about many different 
things, compared to 73% across OECD countries. Moreover, 58% of students reported that they 
apply additional effort when work becomes challenging (OECD average 60%). At the same time, 
18% agree or strongly agree that school has been a waste of time (OECD average: 24%). 
• 
Between 2022 and 2025, these attitudes changed somewhat in Argentina. The share of students 
who reported being curious about many different things remained stable; the proportion who 
reported applying additional effort when work becomes challenging remained stable; and the 
percentage of students who agreed that school had been a waste of time decreased by 
6.2 percentage points during this period. 
• 
Curiosity, perseverance and valuing school are most often associated with higher science 
performance. In Argentina, after accounting for students’ and schools’ socio-economic profile, a 
one-unit increase in the curiosity index is associated with a difference of 17 score points in science 
performance, compared to an average of 19 score points across OECD countries; a one-unit 
increase in the perseverance index is associated with a difference of 10 score points in science 
performance (OECD average: 13 score points); students who perceive greater value in school and 
disagree that it is a waste of time tend to achieve higher scores in science (by 24 score points ) 
than their peers who feel they are wasting their time at school (OECD average: 27 score points). 

8    
PISA 2025 RESULTS (VOLUME I) – COUNTRY NOTES: ARGENTINA © OECD 2026 
  
Student attitudes towards learning 
• 
PISA 2025 also asked students about other attitudes towards learning. For example, 59% of 
students in Argentina have a growth mindset (OECD average: 69%), i.e. hold the belief that 
intelligence can be cultivated through work, effort and feedback. On average across OECD 
countries, students with a growth mindset score 28 score points higher in science than those with 
a fixed mindset. In Argentina, this difference is 27 score points, after accounting for students’ and 
schools’ socio-economic profile. 
• 
PISA 2025 data further describe students’ self-regulation and goal-setting behaviours. For 
example, in Argentina about 41% of students reported that they often or very often plan their 
approach to studying. Furthermore, 53% of students ask themselves questions about the material 
to check if they have understood everything (OECD averages: 37% and 49%, respectively). 
• 
An autonomous self-regulated learner knows when and where to ask for help. PISA 2025 data 
show that, in most countries, students tend to rely on their teachers and classmates for support 
with their schoolwork. In Argentina, 80% of students ask their teachers for help when they need it 
and 80% ask their classmates when they do not fully understand something (OECD averages: 77% 
and 82%, respectively). 
• 
In Argentina self-regulated goal-setting and help-seeking are positively related to science 
performance, after accounting for students’ and schools’ socio-economic profile. A one-unit 
increase in the index of goal-setting is associated with a difference of 5 score points (OECD 
average: 3 score points).A one-unit increase in the index of help-seeking is associated with a 
difference of 10 score points (OECD average: 6 score points). 
How is school life in Argentina? 
Perceived shortages of human and material resources 
• 
In 2025, 44% of students in Argentina were in schools whose principals reported that instruction 
was hindered, at least to some extent, by a perceived lack of teaching staff (OECD average: 39%); 
the corresponding share for a perceived lack of assisting staff was 42% (OECD average: 39%). 
The prevalence of perceived teaching staff shortages in Argentina did not change significantly 
compared to 2022. 
• 
PISA 2025 data reveal that perceived shortages of material resources remain a concern in most 
countries and economies. Some 54% of students in Argentina attended schools whose principals 
reported that a lack of educational material (e.g. textbooks, IT equipment, library or laboratory 
material) hindered instruction, at least to some extent, and 50% were in schools where a lack of 
physical infrastructure (e.g. buildings, grounds, heating/cooling systems, lighting and acoustic 
systems) was perceived to hinder instruction. In 2022, the corresponding shares were 46% and 
45%, respectively. 
Digital resources 
• 
In Argentina, students reported spending on average 1.7 hours per day using digital devices at 
school for learning activities (OECD average: 1.7 hours). At the same time, a non-negligible share 
of students’ device use on school days is dedicated to non-learning activities: students in Argentina 
reported spending 1.6 hours per day using digital devices at school for leisure (OECD average: 
1.1 hours). 
• 
In Argentina, 55% of students reported that their peers are often distracted by the use of digital 
devices during most or all science lessons (OECD average: 28%). On average across OECD 

   9 
PISA 2025 RESULTS (VOLUME I) – COUNTRY NOTES: ARGENTINA © OECD 2026 
  
countries, students who reported digital distraction in their science classes score 11 points lower 
in science than those who reported no digital distraction (after accounting for students’ and schools’ 
socio-economic profile). Argentina is among the minority of countries and economies in which 
digital distraction is not associated with significant differences in student performance. 
• 
In Argentina, students in schools where cell phone use is not allowed on school premises are about 
19% less likely to report digital distraction (OECD average: 13% less likely). In 2025, 37% of 
students in Argentina attended schools with such a ban (OECD average: 49%), close to the level 
observed in PISA 2022 (30%; OECD average in PISA 2022: 34%). 
• 
Students in most education systems use AI chatbots for schoolwork, creating new challenges and 
opportunities for their learning. In Argentina, 52% of students reported using AI chatbots to help 
them learn at least once a week (OECD average: 46%). Students also frequently use AI to conduct 
preliminary research on a new topic (Argentina: 41%; OECD average: 31%), to summarise a text 
they had to read (Argentina: 41%; OECD average: 30%), and to draft text for writing assignments 
(Argentina: 32%; OECD average: 29%).Only 10% of students reported never or almost never using 
AI chatbots for any of the schoolwork tasks examined in PISA (OECD average: 14%). 
Bullying and cyberbullying 
• 
In Argentina, 20% of students reported being victims of at least one form of bullying a few times 
per month or more in 2025 (OECD average: 20%). The prevalence of bullying did not change 
significantly between PISA 2022 and PISA 2025, whereas it increased in a large majority of 
participating countries and economies. 
• 
Cyberbullying is relatively uncommon compared with other forms of bullying, but its victims tend to 
experience significant achievement deficits. In Argentina, 4% of students reported that upsetting 
information about them was published online, without their consent, at least a few times a month 
during the 12 months prior to the PISA test (OECD average: 3%). These students scored, on 
average, 46 points lower in science than their peers. 
Teacher support and disciplinary climate in science lessons 
• 
In Argentina, 78% of students reported that, in most science lessons, the teacher shows an interest 
in every student’s learning (OECD average: 69%), 73% that the teacher continues teaching until 
the students understand (OECD average: 66%), 79% that the teacher gives extra help when 
students need it (OECD average: 73%). 
• 
Disciplinary climate in science lessons in 2025 remains a concern in many countries and 
economies: about 29% of students in Argentina reported that they cannot work well in most or all 
lessons (OECD average: 19%); 58% reported noise and disorder disrupted most or every science 
lesson (OECD average: 31%); 47% of students reported that their classmates do not listen to what 
the teacher says (OECD average: 29%). 
Parental involvement and support 
• 
Student reports of family support substantially decreased in almost all PISA-participating countries 
and economies between 2022 and 2025. This was also the case in Argentina. In 2025, 62% of 
students in Argentina reported that their parents or guardians asked them, at least once per week, 
what they did at school , while 44% reported having at least weekly discussions about problems 
they might have at school. In 2022, the corresponding shares were 67% and 52%, respectively. 

10    
PISA 2025 RESULTS (VOLUME I) – COUNTRY NOTES: ARGENTINA © OECD 2026 
  
Truancy and lateness 
• 
In 2025, around 20% of students in Argentina reported having skipped at least one day of school 
in the two weeks prior to the test (OECD average: 22%); 20% reported skipping at least one class 
(OECD average: 24%); 66% reported arriving late for school (OECD average: 50%). In previous 
years, the corresponding shares were 15%, 17% and 60% (in 2022); 45%, 56% and 53% (in 2018). 
Student readiness for environmental challenges 
• 
In Argentina, 43% of students reached at least baseline proficiency (Level 2) in environmental 
science. On average across OECD countries, 74% of students achieve this level, with more than 
85% reaching it in seven countries and economies. 
• 
PISA 2025 shows that students in most education systems report strong pro-environmental 
attitudes, although fewer feel confident about how to collaborate effectively. In Argentina, 73% of 
students believe that they can positively impact the environment (OECD average: 81%); 78% 
believe that collective action can address environmental problems (OECD average: 82%); 61% 
report knowing how to work with others to positively impact the environment (OECD average: 68%). 
• 
In Argentina, 71% of students reported that they are somewhat or very interested in contributing to 
protecting the environment in their future jobs (OECD average: 62%). 
• 
Most students engaged in environment-related activities at least once over the 12 months prior to 
the PISA test. On average across OECD countries, the most common forms of engagement are 
discussing with friends and family how to have a positive impact on the environment (Argentina: 
54%; OECD average: 56%) and making purchasing decisions based on the sustainability of 
products (OECD average: 54%; 43% in Argentina). 
Key Features of PISA 2025 in Argentina 
The content 
• 
The PISA 2025 survey focused on science, with mathematics and reading as minor areas; an 
assessment of learning in the digital world measured students’ computational problem-solving 
skills and their ability to self-direct their learning in a digital environment. Results for science, 
mathematics, reading and computational problem solving are released on 8 September 2026 and 
analyses of students’ self-directed learning in 2027. 
The students 
• 
Over 760 000 students took the assessment in 2025, representing about 33 million 15-year-olds in 
the schools of the 91 participating countries and economies. 
• 
In Argentina, 11 093 students, in 412 schools, completed the assessment, representing about 
609 100 15-year-old students (an estimated 87% of the total population of 15-year-olds). 
• 
PISA students are aged between 15 years 3 months and 16 years 2 months at the time of the 
assessment, and they have completed at least 6 years of formal schooling. In this note, they are 
referred to as 15-year-old students. 

   11 
PISA 2025 RESULTS (VOLUME I) – COUNTRY NOTES: ARGENTINA © OECD 2026 
  
The assessment 
• 
Students took a two hour test, and each student was tested in two subjects. Different students were 
given different test questions and different combinations of subjects (e.g. science followed by 
reading, or mathematics followed by science, etc.). Test items were a mixture of multiple-choice 
questions and questions requiring students to construct their own responses. 
• 
Students also answered a background questionnaire, which took about 35 minutes to complete. 
The questionnaire sought information about the students themselves, their attitudes, dispositions 
and beliefs, their homes, and their school and learning experiences. School principals completed 
a questionnaire about school management, organisation, and the learning environment. 
• 
Some countries/economies also distributed additional questionnaires, to students, parents and/or 
teachers, to elicit more information. The findings from these optional questionnaires are not 
covered by this note. 
Contact 
For more information about PISA 2025 visit www.oecd.org/pisa 
Explore, compare and visualise more data and analysis using http://gpseducation.oecd.org. 
Questions can be directed to the PISA team at the Directorate for Education and Skills: 
edu.pisa@oecd.org. 
This note was written by Francesco Avvisati (OECD Directorate for Education and Skills). 
 
 

12    
PISA 2025 RESULTS (VOLUME I) – COUNTRY NOTES: ARGENTINA © OECD 2026 
  
This work is published under the responsibility of the Secretary-General of the OECD. The opinions expressed and 
arguments employed herein do not necessarily reflect the official views of the Member countries of the OECD. 
This document, as well as any data and map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over 
any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area. 
The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli authorities. The use of 
such data by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem and Israeli settlements 
in the West Bank under the terms of international law. 
Note by the Republic of Türkiye 
The information in this document with reference to “Cyprus” relates to the southern part of the Island. There is no 
single authority representing both Turkish and Greek Cypriot people on the Island. Türkiye recognises the Turkish 
Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC). Until a lasting and equitable solution is found within the context of the United 
Nations, Türkiye shall preserve its position concerning the “Cyprus issue”. 
Note by all the European Union Member States of the OECD and the European Union 
The Republic of Cyprus is recognised by all members of the United Nations with the exception of Türkiye. The 
information in this document relates to the area under the effective control of the Government of the Republic of 
Cyprus. 
Kosovo: This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with United Nations Security Council 
Resolution 1244/99 and the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice on Kosovo’s declaration of 
independence. 
  
The full book is available in English: OECD (2026), PISA 2025 Results (Volume I): Future-Ready Students, PISA, 
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/73451bc5-en. 
  
© OECD 2026 
 Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) 
This work is made available under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International licence. By using this work, you 
accept to be bound by the terms of this licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
Attribution – you must cite the work. 
Translations – you must cite the original work, identify changes to the original and add the following text: In the event 
of any discrepancy between the original work and the translation, only the text of the original work should be considered 
valid. 
Adaptations – you must cite the original work and add the following text: This is an adaptation of an original work by 
the OECD. The opinions expressed and arguments employed in this adaptation should not be reported as representing 
the official views of the OECD or of its Member countries. 
Third-party material – the licence does not apply to third-party material in the work. If using such material, you are 
responsible for obtaining permission from the third party and for any claims of infringement. 
You must not use the OECD logo, visual identity or cover image without express permission or suggest the OECD 
endorses your use of the work. 
Any dispute arising under this licence shall be settled by arbitration in accordance with the Permanent Court of 
Arbitration (PCA) Arbitration Rules 2012. The seat of arbitration shall be Paris (France). The number of arbitrators 
shall be one. 
