 
The Rising use of Artificial 
Intelligence in K-12 
Education 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
A Report of the  
Pennsylvania Advisory Committee to the  
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights 
 
December 2024 

 
Acknowledgments 
The Pennsylvania Advisory Committee would like to acknowledge the speakers who 
presented during the Committee’s series of public meetings taking place in March and 
April 2024 as the Committee worked to understand broad and diverse perspectives on 
the civil rights impact of the rising use of artificial intelligence in education. The 
Committee is also grateful to those who contributed to this work during public comment 
and via written testimony.  
Advisory Committees to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights 
The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights has established an advisory committee in each of the 50 
states, the District of Columbia, and five U.S. territories. The committees are composed of citizens 
who serve without compensation. The committees advise the Commission of civil-rights issues in 
their state or territory that are within the Commission’s jurisdiction. They are authorized to advise 
the Commission in writing of any knowledge or information they have of any alleged deprivation 
of voting rights and alleged discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, 
national origin, or in the administration of justice; advise the Commission on matters of their state 
or territory’s concern in the preparation of Commission reports to the President and the Congress; 
receive reports, suggestions, and recommendations from individuals, public officials, and 
representatives of public and private organizations to committee inquiries; forward advice and 
recommendations to the Commission, as requested; and observe any open hearing or conference 
conducted by the Commission in their states. 
 
 
 

 
1 
 
Pennsylvania Advisory Committee to the  
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights 
The Pennsylvania Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights submits this report 
regarding the rising use of artificial intelligence in K-12 education. The contents of this report are 
primarily based on testimony the Committee heard during public meetings held via 
videoconference in March and April of 2024. The Committee also includes related testimony 
submitted in writing during the relevant period of public comment. 
This report begins with a brief background of the issues the Committee considered. It then presents 
primary findings as they emerged from the relevant testimony, as well as recommendations for 
addressing areas of civil-rights concern. This report is intended to focus on civil-rights concerns 
regarding the use of artificial intelligence in education. The Committee specifically sought to 
examine how AI algorithms are developed, and the impact they can have on either reducing or 
exacerbating existing disparities (or creating new disparities) in the classroom based on federally 
protected classes. While additional important topics may have surfaced throughout the 
Committee’s inquiry, those matters that are outside the scope of this specific civil-rights mandate 
are left for another discussion. 
 
Pennsylvania Advisory Committee to the  
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights 
Steve Irwin, Chair, Pittsburgh  
Romana Lee-Akiyama, co-Vice Chair, Philadelphia 
Nathan McGrath, co-Vice Chair, Mechanicsburg 
Guerline L. Laurore, Secretary, Hummelstown 
Christopher Brooks, Editorial Officer, East Stroudsburg 
 
Jessie Allen, Pittsburgh 
Mary Crossley, Pittsburgh 
Andrew Cuff, Latrobe 
 
Angela McIver, Philadelphia 
Samuel Park, Schwenksville 
 
 
 
 

 
2 
 
Overview  
On December 13, 2023, the Pennsylvania Advisory Committee (Committee) to the U.S. 
Commission on Civil Rights (Commission) adopted a proposal to study the rising use of artificial 
intelligence (AI) in K-12 education. The focus of the Committee’s inquiry was to examine how AI 
algorithms are developed, and the impact they can have on either reducing or exacerbating existing 
disparities1 (or creating new disparities) in K-12 classrooms based on federally protected classes. 
The Committee also examined potential solutions and recommendations to remediate identified 
concerns.  
As part of this inquiry, the Committee heard testimony via a series of web-based video conferences 
held throughout the months of March and April, 2024.2 The following report results from a review 
of the testimony provided at these meetings, combined with written testimony submitted during 
the related timeframe. It begins with a brief background of the issues to be considered by the 
Committee. It then presents primary findings as they emerged from this testimony. Finally, it 
makes recommendations for addressing identified civil-rights concerns. This report focuses on the 
civil-rights impact of the rising use of AI in education throughout Pennsylvania (and the country). 
While other important topics may have surfaced throughout the Committee’s inquiry, matters that 
are outside the scope of this specific civil-rights mandate are left for another discussion. This report 
and the recommendations included within it were adopted unanimously by the Committee on 
November 20, 2024. 
Background 
Despite the promise of equal educational opportunity, significant disparities persist in educational 
opportunities, outcomes, and academic achievement based on race, sex, and national origin.3 
Students of color are often concentrated in schools with fewer resources; more likely to be 
subjected to out-of-classroom disciplinary measures; have less access to honors or advanced 
placement courses; and are more concentrated in schools with less qualified teachers, teachers with 
 
1 Robinson, Kimberly Jenkins, Protecting Education as a Civil Right: Remedying Racial Discrimination and Ensuring a 
High-Quality 
Education 
(December 
2021). 
Learning 
Policy 
Institute 
2021, 
Available 
at 
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4053723; American Psychological Association, Education Directorate: Ethnic and 
Racial Disparities in Education, at: https://www.apa.org/ed/resources/racial-disparities; United Negro College Fund, 
K-12 Disparity Facts and Statistics, at: https://uncf.org/pages/k-12-disparity-facts-and-stats.  
2 Meeting records and transcripts are available in Appendix.  
Briefing before the Pennsylvania Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, March 25, 2024, (web-
based), Transcript (hereinafter cited as “Transcript I”). 
Briefing before the Pennsylvania Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, March 27, 2024, (web-
based), Transcript (hereinafter cited as “Transcript II”). 
Briefing before the Pennsylvania Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, March 29, 2024, (web-
based), Transcript (hereinafter cited as “Transcript III”). 
Briefing before the Pennsylvania Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, April 25, 2024, (web-
based), Transcript (hereinafter cited as “Transcript IV”). 
3 American Psychological Association, Presidential Task Force on Educational Disparities. (2012). Ethnic and racial 
disparities in education: Psychology’s contributions to understanding and reducing disparities (pp. 14 et. seq.). 
Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/ed/resources/racial-disparities.aspx; United Negro College Fund, K-12 Disparity 
Facts and Statistics, at: https://uncf.org/pages/k-12-disparity-facts-and-stats. 

 
3 
 
lower salaries, and novice teachers.4 Advocates point to standardized testing as a cautionary tale 
of how attempts to streamline education can cause additional harm to marginalized groups.5 For 
example, persistent racial disparities in SAT and ACT scores have been highlighted as a 
hinderance which reflects and reenforces racial disparities across generations.6  
In considering the impact of AI on education inequality, it is crucial to separate two broad 
functions: teaching students how to understand and use AI and using AI to teach, evaluate and 
monitor students. The first is absolutely crucial, as students will definitely encounter AI in the 
world and need to know how to work with it in order to be successful. The second must be 
approached with great caution, in order not to cause harm. 
AI has already entered the education world, promising solutions to allow teachers and 
administrators to more easily personalize and streamline tasks such as adjusting learning plans for 
individual student needs.7 These uses have the potential to offer enhanced, individual learning 
opportunity for students who may otherwise have been marginalized by more traditional education 
approaches. Such benefits must be considered with appropriate caution, however. The “digital 
divide” in access to technology already poses disadvantages for students in schools and districts 
with fewer resources than their peers in higher-resourced areas. What’s more, bias in AI 
programming is a well-documented phenomenon that has proven difficult for developers to 
correct.8 Bias can stem from training data used to teach AI systems how to make decisions, flawed 
algorithms resulting from such training data, and/or from cognitive biases of programmers who 
determine how the data is selected or weighted.9 When used in educational settings, such biases 
can cause serious civil rights concerns. For example,  
• E-proctoring programs, designed to authenticate and monitor student activity during online 
exams, have repeatedly resulted in failed facial recognition for students with darker skin 
tones, trans, and non-binary people. These programs also have been known to flag 
mundane actions as potential cheating, such as eye movement tracking, or if a student reads 
a question out loud, which may disproportionately impact students with learning 
differences and neurodivergences.10  
 
4 U.S. Department of Education, Office of Civil Rights Data Snapshot (2014), as reported by the United Negro College 
Fund, https://uncf.org/pages/k-12-disparity-facts-and-stats.  
5 Perry, Andre and Turner-Lee, Nicol. The Hechinger Report. AI can disrupt racial inequity in schools, or make it much 
worse. (September 2019) At: https://hechingerreport.org/ai-can-disrupt-racial-inequity-in-schools-or-make-it-
much-worse/.  
6 Reeves, Richard and Halikias, Dimitrios. Race gaps in SAT scores highlight inequality and hinder upward mobility. 
Brookings. (February 2017) at: https://www.brookings.edu/articles/race-gaps-in-sat-scores-highlight-inequality-
and-hinder-upward-mobility/.  
7 Marr, Bernard. How is AI used in education: Real world examples of today and a peek into the future. Forbes (July 
2018), 
at: 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2018/07/25/how-is-ai-used-in-education-real-world-
examples-of-today-and-a-peek-into-the-future/?sh=12821553586e.  
8 IBM Data and AI Team: Shedding Light on AI Bias with Real World Examples (October 2023), at: 
https://www.ibm.com/blog/shedding-light-on-ai-bias-with-real-world-examples/. 
9 Ibid. 
10 https://www.baneproctoring.com/#letter; See also: https://www.fightforthefuture.org/news/2021-07-08-19-
human-rights-civil-liberties-and-youth/; Brown, Lydia X.Z. How Automated Test Proctoring Software Discriminates 

 
4 
 
• AI technology is being used in some districts to assess students’ prior and ongoing learning 
levels, to place students at appropriate subject levels, to schedule classes, and individualize 
instruction. If unchecked, algorithmic biases may perpetuate existing inequalities, for 
example, trapping low-income and minority students into low-achievement tracks.11 
• Reports suggest that internet filtering and blocking technology on student devices is more 
likely to block content associated with or about LGBTQ+ students and content that is 
associated with or about students of color, effectively resulting in a “digital book ban” with 
little visibility or monitoring.12  
• School technology use has resulted in increased privacy concerns related to disciplinary 
actions.13 In November of 2020, a county police department in Florida was found to be 
using sensitive school district data to identify “at-risk youth who are destined to a life of 
crime.”14  
• Schools are increasingly sending student online monitoring data to law enforcement 
officials. Students from low-income families, Black students, and Hispanic students are at 
the greatest risk of harm. This results because these students are more likely to rely on 
school-issued devices and thus are subjected to greater surveillance, law enforcement 
contact, and school discipline than their peers using personal devices.15  
• The use of student activity monitoring software has also resulted in the nonconsensual 
disclosure of student sexual orientation and gender identity.16  
 
Against Disabled Students. Center for Democracy & Technology (November 2020), At: https://cdt.org/insights/how-
automated-test-proctoring-software-discriminates-against-disabled-students/.  
11 Paisley, Erinne. Teaching Students to Question Mr. Robot: Working to Prevent Algorithmic Bias in Educational 
Artificial Intelligence. Datactive. (August 2020). At: https://data-activism.net/2020/08/teaching-students-to-
question-mr-robot-working-to-prevent-algorithmic-bias-in-educational-artificial-intelligence/; Responsible Use of 
Data and Technology in Education: Managing Equity and Bias in Algorithmic Systems. Center for Democracy & 
Technology. 
At: 
https://cdt.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/2021-02-19-Managing-Equity-and-Bias-in-
Algorithmic-Systems-Two-Pager-FINAL.pdf. 
12 Center for Democracy & Technology. EdTech Threats to Student Privacy and Equity in the Age of AI (September 
2023), At: https://cdt.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/091923-CDT-Off-Task-web.pdf. Gallegos, Emma. AI, other 
education technology can infringe on rights of disabled, LGBTQ students, report warns. EdSource. September 2023, 
at: 
https://edsource.org/2023/ai-other-education-technology-can-infringe-on-rights-of-disabled-lgbt-students-
report-
warns/697601#:~:text=The%20use%20of%20education%20technology,new%20report%20released%20Wednesday
%20warns. 
13 https://www.cnn.com/2020/09/26/us/student-suspended-gun-virtual/index.html  
14 Lieberman, Mark. Using Student Data to Identify Future Criminals: A Privacy Debacle. Education Week: Data. 
(November 2020), At: https://www.edweek.org/technology/using-student-data-to-identify-future-criminals-a-
privacy-debacle/2020/11.  
15 Hidden Harms: The Misleading Promise of Monitoring Students Online. Center for Democracy & Technology, 
(August 
2022) 
at: 
https://cdt.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/Hidden-Harms-The-Misleading-Promise-of-
Monitoring-Students-Online-Research-Report-Final-Accessible.pdf  
16 Ibid. 

 
5 
 
During a 2019 conference on the topic, experts from around the globe sought to examine the 
current state of AI in education. 17 These experts advised appropriate caution and additional 
research before adopting more widespread use of the technology.18 In late 2022, the White House 
Office of Science and Technology Policy released a Blueprint for an “AI Bill of Rights” 19 
including five key principles to address related concerns: 
1. Protection from unsafe or ineffective systems, including pre-deployment testing and 
ongoing monitoring to ensure the safety and efficacy of systems used.  
2. Algorithmic discrimination protection: requiring designers, developers, and deployers of 
automated systems to ensure that systems are proactively designed and continually 
monitored to ensure they are used in an equitable manner.  
3. Data privacy: ensuring people have choices about how data about them is being used.  
4. Notice and explanation: ensuring people are aware of the systems being used and how and 
why they contribute to outcomes that impact them.  
5. Human alternatives, consideration, and fallback: people should have the choice to opt-out 
of automated systems and have access to a person who can quickly consider and remedy 
problems they encounter.  
In this study, the Committee examined the rising use of AI in Pennsylvania elementary and 
secondary schools and educational institutions. In the ensuing report, the Committee discusses 
appropriate uses and benefits of incorporating AI in educational programs, as well as related civil-
rights cautions and policy recommendations.  
Methodology 
As a matter of historical precedent, and in order to achieve transparency, Committee studies 
involve a collection of public, testimonial evidence and written comments from individuals 
directly impacted by the civil rights topic at hand; researchers and experts who have rigorously 
studied and reported on the topic; community organizations and advocates representing a broad 
range of backgrounds and perspectives related to the topic; and government officials tasked with 
related policy decisions and the administration of those policies.  
Committee studies require Committee members to use their expertise in selecting a sample of 
panelists that is the most useful to the purposes of the study and will result in a broad and diverse 
understanding of the issue. This method of (non-probability) judgment sampling requires 
Committee members to draw from their own experiences, knowledge, opinions, and views to gain 
understanding of the issue and possible policy solutions. Committees are composed of volunteer 
professionals who are familiar with civil rights issues in their state or territory. Members represent 
 
17 Where does artificial intelligence fit in the classroom? Exploring myths, realities, and risks of bringing AI into 
education’s 
future. 
Teachers 
College 
of 
Columbia 
University. 
(September 
2019), 
at: 
https://www.tc.columbia.edu/aiconference/  
18 Ibid. 
19 Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights, The White House, at: https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/ai-bill-of-rights/ (last 
accessed November 2024). 

 
6 
 
a variety of political viewpoints, occupations, races, ages, and gender identities, as well as a variety 
of backgrounds, skills, and experiences. The intentional diversity of each Committee promotes 
vigorous debate and full exploration of the issues. It also serves to assist in offsetting biases that 
can result in oversight of nuances in the testimony.  
In fulfillment of Committees’ responsibility to advise the Commission of civil rights matters in 
their locales, Committees conduct an in-depth review and thematic analysis of the testimony 
received and other data gathered throughout the course of their inquiry. Committee members use 
this publicly collected information, often from those directly impacted by the civil rights topic of 
study, or others with direct expert knowledge of such matters, to identify findings and 
recommendations to report to the Commission. Drafts of the Committee’s report are publicly 
available and shared with panelists and other contributors to ensure that their testimony was 
accurately captured. Reports are also shared with affected agencies to request clarification 
regarding allegations noted in testimony.  
For the purposes of this study, Findings are defined as what the testimony and other data 
suggested, revealed, or indicated based upon the data collected by the Committee. Findings refer 
to a synthesis of observations confirmed by majority vote of members, rather than conclusions 
drawn by any one member. Recommendations are specific actions or proposed policy 
interventions intended to address or alleviate the civil rights concerns raised in the related 
finding(s). Where findings indicate a lack of sufficient knowledge or available data to fully 
understand the civil rights issues at hand, recommendations may also target specific directed areas 
in need of further, more rigorous study. Recommendations are directed to the Commission; they 
request that the Commission itself take a specific action, or that the Commission forward 
recommendations to other federal or state agencies, policy makers, or stakeholders.  
 
 

 
7 
 
Findings 
In keeping with their duty to inform the Commission of (1) matters related to discrimination or a 
denial of equal protection of the laws; and (2) matters of mutual concern in the preparation of 
reports of the Commission to the President and the Congress, 20 the Pennsylvania Advisory 
Committee submits the following findings to the Commission regarding the rising use of artificial 
intelligence in education. This report seeks to highlight the most salient civil-rights themes as they 
emerged from the Committee’s inquiry. The complete meeting transcripts and written testimony 
received are included in Appendix A and B for further reference.  
Finding 1: Artificial Intelligence may have the potential to assist teachers and improve the 
educational experiences of children, providing them with valuable technological skills that 
could narrow opportunity gaps. It also has the potential to disrupt critical student-teacher 
relationships, diminish critical thinking, promote or reinforce bias, and widen the digital 
divide. As such, any use of AI in schools must be critically evaluated and implemented with 
proper precaution. 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a set of computing capabilities that allows machines to complete tasks 
typically associated with intelligent beings, such as perceiving the environment, analyzing and 
generalizing information, and providing sensible responses to questions and prompts.21 Over the 
past decade, among other uses AI has been encoded in the background of email, social media, 
streaming services, and web-browsers.22 More recently, AI-based tools have merged into a variety 
of public spaces, including in education. 23 With each potential new use of AI in education 
however, experts have urged caution.24 A 2024 policy brief by the National Education Policy 
Center recommended a “pause” on AI use in education until appropriate regulations can be put in 
place.25 AI’s current capacity is narrow and limited to very specific tasks that can be reduced to 
mathematical algorithms.26 These algorithms can produce erroneous information; be trained on 
biased datasets; and undermine other, evidence-based teaching methodologies and students 
supports. 27 Concerns regarding efficacy, accuracy, privacy, bias, and the like have led some 
 
20 45 C.F.R. § 703.2. 
21 Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 11 liens 34-38; Stewart Testimony, Transcript I, p. 8 lines 3-17. 
22 Dias Testimony, Transcript III, p. 3 lines 7-25. 
23 Dias Testimony, Transcript III, p. 8 line 27 – p. 9 line 5 (The education technology field has merged into social 
technology, which merged into education, so there is no boundary between technology at large in society and 
technology in schools). 
24 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 13 lines 27-35 (while AI has the potential to “improve pedagogical practices and 
student performance,” successful use of the technology requires a “deliberate, considered, and systematic 
approach” to its adoption in k-12 education). 
25 Williamson, B., Molnar, A., & Boninger, F. (2024). Time for a pause: Without effective public oversight, AI in schools 
will do more harm than good. Boulder, CO: National Education Policy Center. Retrieved September 2024 
from http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/ai. See also: Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 5 lines 27-34; Concerns 
include: (1) inadequate research base; (2) restricted teaching and learning; (3) curricular misinformation; (4) AI 
programs are mechanized and limit critical thinking and grappling with information like should be taught in 
education. AI promotes low-level rote learning and thinking skills. 
26 Stewart Testimony, Transcript I, p. 8 lines 3-17. 
27 Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 7 line 40 – p. 8 line 12; Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 13 lines 3-9; Dobrin 
Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 4 lines 12-18; Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 26 line 37-p. 27 line 7. 

 
8 
 
scholars to recommend restricting or prohibiting AI use in schools entirely, particularly in the 
youngest classrooms.28 Specific uses and related concerns are described in additional detail in the 
following sections of this report.  
AI assistance for teachers 
AI can assist teachers with tasks such as personalizing lesson plans, drafting emails, creating 
grading rubrics, and evaluating students’ work, 29 giving teachers more time to spend with 
students.30 Each of these tasks must be carefully implemented and monitored, however, including 
training teachers to identify problematic outputs.31 For example, when using AI-based tools to 
personalize lesson plans, teachers must review these adaptations to ensure that they are appropriate 
for the student’s needs.32 Teachers must similarly play an active role in monitoring output when 
using AI to evaluate student performance: AI has been found to award higher scores for use of 
sophisticated language, even if it is not used correctly.33 It has also been found to unfairly dismiss 
dialects, the use of Ebonics, and other culturally intuitive or indigenous languages.34  
Ultimately some of these challenges can be mitigated by ensuring that AI tools serve to 
complement (rather than to replace) traditionally teacher-led tasks,35 and that AI-powered outputs 
reflect appropriate uncertainty to the end user.36 Dr. Angela Stewart of the University of Pittsburgh 
School of Computing illustrated: instead of reporting a particular student as “failing,” a predictive 
AI algorithm could report that a student has a “50% probability” of failing, accompanied by an 
explanation of this assessment, so that the teacher can then make their own decision accordingly.37 
 
28 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 25 lines 30-37. (Districts also need to be intentional about where and how AI 
technology is placed in schools, and may consider prohibiting the use of AI tools in k-3 classrooms entirely due to 
the risk of damaging critical social connections with peers and teachers, particularly at such a young age) Note: 
further discussion of children’s social development needs is included later in this finding.  
29 Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 13 lines 11-18 (teachers need to be educated about their limitations so they can 
watch for inaccurate information, bias, and impact on students); See also: Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 3 lines 
2-10 (AI makes it possible to meet the needs of the lowest performing students while also challenging the highest 
performing students to excel); Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 8 lines 14-36 (adaptivity is probably one of AI’s 
greatest strengths, to adjust and customize lesson plans to personalize student instruction). Stewart Testimony, 
Transcript I, p. 8 lines 18-41 (AI can analyze and score student writing like essays, it can also model what skills 
students have or don’t have and provide personalized content to teach those skills or predict when a student needs 
help and relay that information back to the teacher). 
30 Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 7 line 40 – p. 8 line 12. 
31 Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 15 lines 11-14 (Teachers must be properly trained to watch for potential issues, 
inaccuracies, bias information, and to monitor the impact on students). See also: Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 
31 line 33 – p. 32 line 5 (Woelfel cautions that many people defer to AI assuming that AI knows more than them; 
human overseers need to know that AI must be evaluated for accuracy as a starting point); Turner Lee Testimony, 
Transcript II, p. 10 line 13 – p. 11 line 8 (teachers must be highly trained on how and when to use AI technology) 
Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 14 line 42 – p. 15 line 3 (teachers, students, and parents must be aware of both 
the positive and negative potential of modern AI in education). 
32 Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 10 line 13 – p. 11 line 8; Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 15 lines 11-14. 
33 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 5 lines 38-42. 
34 Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 9 lines 10-17. 
35 Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 10 line 13 – p. 11 line 8. 
36 Stewart Testimony, Transcript I, p. 24 lines 20-30. 
37 Stewart Testimony, Transcript I, p. 24 lines 20-30. 

 
9 
 
Finally, AI use in classrooms must always be accompanied by ongoing reporting and 
accountability mechanisms for when bias is identified. For example, if a teacher notices that AI is 
consistently assigning lower scores to the essays of Black students, that should be reported to the 
program developers, and the developers should be required to address it.38  
AI assistance for students 
For students, AI can assist with tasks like summarizing text, brainstorming, outlining, and spell 
checking.39 It can also provide students with more immediate feedback for improvement on their 
work.40 However, students must be informed about the limited reliability of AI-generated content. 
Students are likely to be exposed to AI technologies in their daily life regardless of access at 
school.41 Therefore, schools must prioritize “information literacy” and teach students how to use 
AI-based technologies so that they are able to accurately evaluate the outputs.42 Teachers must 
also be trained to closely monitor the AI-based information and feedback being presented to 
students in their classrooms, to ensure its accuracy and appropriateness. 
For students with disabilities, AI can provide accommodations such as reading text aloud, taking 
notes, or creating simulations and virtual reality lessons that can make learning more engaging and 
accessible.43 However, as with other uses of AI in education, these tools should serve to augment, 
rather than replace human assistance. To date, students with disabilities have complained that 
technologies such as transcription, live captioning, social-emotional robots, speech recognition, 
and voice recognition are not adequate in quality or accuracy to replace human assistance.44 
AI use by school districts 
For school districts, AI can help provide education access in rural areas where children cannot 
easily get to schools, or in economically disadvantaged areas where parents may not be able to get 
their kids to schools.45 AI-based “e-learning” programs used in this way must again be closely 
monitored for accuracy and efficacy, and should only serve to augment existing services—filling 
in gaps in coverage and providing additional supports—rather than replacing them.46 
 
38 Stewart Testimony, Transcript I, p. 24 lines 31-37; Note: additional discussion of bias is included in Finding 2.  
39 Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 13 lines 18-28. 
40 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 3 lines 17-22. 
41 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 23 lines 31-33; Bilger Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 28 lines 28-36. 
42 Bilger Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 22 lines 1-11. 
43 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 3 lines 10-17; lines 26-32 (AI can create a more engaging learning experience 
for students with attention disorders and other disabilities through simulations and virtual reality); Shah Testimony, 
Transcript IV, p. 13 lines 5-10; p. 16 lines 24-30; p. 28 lines 7-9 (assistive technology powered by AI has a lot of 
potential to benefit students with disabilities, however research is still lacking); Stewart Testimony, Transcript I, p. 8 
lines 18-41 (assistive technology might read text out loud for a student who is visually impaired). 
44 Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 13 lines 14-25. 
45 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 3 lines 10-17. 
46 Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 10 line 13 – p. 11 line 8 (advised that where AI is utilized, it should serve to 
compliment, rather than to replace, traditionally teacher-led tasks such as curriculum personalization and student 
performance assessments). 

 
10 
 
Finally, AI-powered programs can allow schools and districts to get enhanced data to identify 
patterns, predict performance, and flag student issues early on. 47 This data can help districts 
identify areas of need and target resources most effectively; however, districts using AI in this way 
must carefully consider privacy concerns and continually monitor outputs for bias.48  
Social-emotional learning and critical thinking 
Much of the focus of primary education, particularly in the youngest classrooms, is on social and 
emotional learning. Children benefit from direct interaction with their teachers and peers, as well 
as from physical movement and activity.49 Andrew Buher, founder and director of the national 
nonprofit Opportunity Labs, as well as scholar and lecturer at Princeton University School of 
Public and International Affairs, is an expert on policy and implementation challenges associated 
with the digital divide and technology adoption in k-12 schools.50 Mr. Buher testified that one of 
the reasons technology has failed in education in the past is that it cannot motivate students and 
scaffold support in the same way that human teachers can. 51 He cautioned that excessive 
technology use and the subsequent “collapse in play” is contributing to today’s “disastrous youth 
mental health crisis.”52 Michelle King of the Learning Instigator emphasized the importance of 
relationship building and trust in the educational environment.53 She cautioned that AI provides 
“the allure of solving problems quickly,” but may not be solving the right problem.54 Ms. King 
posited that increasing personal, human connection is the real solution to many of today’s 
challenges in education.55 Yet, over-reliance on technology can undermine these critical human 
relationships and interactions. 56 Direct, personal interaction and human relationships are 
particularly important for children who are facing social and economic challenges, violence, 
illness, and other traumas.57 Chad Dion-Lassiter, Executive Director of the Pennsylvania Human 
Relations Commission acknowledged that if incorporated consciously, AI might be useful for 
 
47 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 3 lines 22-26. (see cautions re: early warning systems in Finding 3) 
48 Further discussion of data privacy and cautions regarding bias is included in Findings 3&4. 
49 Dion Lassiter Testimony, Transcript III, p. 22 lines 5-31 (Young learners benefit from fluid human contact with 
teachers and peers, presenting to one another, reading to one another, playing physical games like hopscotch and 
dodgeball. We want to reduce sedentary behavior and increase activity and interaction and that should be carefully 
considered). 
50 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 13 line 36-p. 14 line 5; profile at: https://www.future-ed.org/team/andrew-
buher/  
51 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 31 lines 1-18. 
52 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 26 lines 5-9. 
53 King Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 10 lines 23-30 (“Social change moves at the speed of relationships, relationships 
move at the speed of trust. We need to focus on how we are in relationship with one another.”) 
54 King Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 18 lines 19-37. 
55 King Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 18 lines 19-37. 
56 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 4 lines 12-18 (reliance on technology potentially undermines the role of human 
teachers and the relationship between teachers and students (and students with their peers) and face to face 
interactions). See also: Dion Lassiter Testimony, Transcript III, p. 18 lines 18-29 (schools do better when they are 
student centered, and Socratic, which requires teacher interaction with the students.); King Testimony, Transcript 
IV, p. 18 lines 19-37 (AI amplifies the separation even when we all have commonality); Dion Lassiter Testimony, 
Transcript III, p. 18 lines 18-29 (AI can empower educators, personalize education, and accelerate learning, but it can 
also produce bias, misinformation, and student isolation). 
57 Dion Lassiter Testimony, Transcript III, p. 21 lines 1-19; p. 22 line 32 – p. 24 line 9. 

 
11 
 
coordinating school services or measuring outcomes;58 but particularly for youth experiencing 
trauma and other interpersonal challenges, “face-to-face contact, interaction, and interpersonal 
skill building cannot be substituted through AI programming.”59 
Another primary purpose of education is to teach children “to think for themselves, not just to 
amass knowledge as quickly and efficiently as possible.”60 But AI-powered teaching and learning 
tools tend to promote “rote, low-level learning and thinking skills,” rather than promoting the 
development of critical thinking.61 Exacerbating this concern, AI is specifically designed to create 
the impression of thought and intelligence, so users often place undue trust in its responses even if 
those responses are completely false or based on biased data.62 Without developing the necessary 
information literacy and critical thinking skills, AI can provide dangerous opportunities for the 
spread of misinformation and bias.63 Mr. Buher concluded, “The potential benefits [of AI] are real, 
but generally they’re far off and they’re speculative.”64 He offered the example of a theoretical 
classroom in which AI assistance is implemented to support teachers.65 While the tools are initially 
helpful in tailoring lesson plans and providing student feedback, gradually they reduce meaningful 
interaction between students, teachers, and their peers. Teachers begin to deprioritize providing 
students with individual feedback and miss opportunities to really know them. Students begin to 
rely heavily on AI to make decisions, diminishing problem solving, creativity, and critical 
thinking. The AI tools make recommendations that are either not appropriate or are simply false. 
The need to continuously vet AI-generated content eliminates any time savings for teachers, 
undermining the purpose of the tools in the first place.66  
Considerations regarding the digital divide 
Schools’ use of new and emerging AI-based tools and technologies raises questions of equitable 
access to computers, high-speed internet, and other resources necessary to utilize these programs 
effectively.67 This “digital divide” is seen in both economically disadvantaged urban areas and in 
 
58 Dion Lassiter Testimony, Transcript III, p. 21 lines 19-26. 
59 Dion Lassiter Testimony, Transcript III, p. 22 lines 2-4. 
60 Boulder Testimony, Transcript III, p. 5 line 23 – p. 7 line 12. 
61 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 5 lines 27-34. 
62 Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 18 line 39 – p.19 line 11 (AI responses are often trusted more than humans); 
Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 15 lines 19-27 (AI is designed to create the impression of thought and intelligence, 
so students will place undue trust in the technology and come to over rely on it); Bilger Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 
19 lines 25-40 (there is an “information literacy deficit” and many people don’t evaluate, they just trust whatever 
they read, especially if it’s coming from a computer, even if it’s based on bias data). 
63 Further discussion of bias, misinformation, and censorship follows in the next sections of this finding, and 
throughout the remaining report. 
64 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 14 line 27 – p. 15 line 18. 
65 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 14 line 27 – p. 15 line 18. 
66 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 14 line 27 – p. 15 line 18. 
67 Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 8 lines 36-43; p. 12 lines 10-17 (53 million school age kids were at home 
during the COVID-19 pandemic, 30% of those did not have access to broadband, many schools struggled with the 
infrastructure to run online learning; AI will not be effective without “ubiquitous internet access”). Dobrin 
Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 4 lines 18-25 (AI can exacerbate the digital divide--populations that are already 
disadvantaged either won’t have access to the technology and/or won’t know how to use it). Buher Testimony, 

 
12 
 
rural areas that may not have widespread technology access.68 Data collection efforts and the 
quality of available data are likely to be much better in districts with more robust resources, 
allowing them to use AI tools more effectively.69 Even when all students have access to technology 
at school, students from more affluent backgrounds will likely have greater technology access at 
home, as well as access to family, private tutors, and other adults to help them navigate related 
challenges.70 As such, Dr. Hoda Heidari of Carnegie Mellon University School of Computer 
Science cautioned that students from lower socioeconomic backgrounds, racial and ethnic 
minorities, and students with disabilities are disproportionately susceptible to AI’s risks and harms, 
while students from more privileged backgrounds are more likely to reap its benefits.71  
While the growing use of new technologies in schools has the potential to widen opportunity gaps 
and exacerbate resource disparities, some have argued that, if implemented intentionally, it may 
improve them. Dr. Joseph Yun of the Swanson School of Engineering at the University of 
Pittsburgh argued that access to AI technologies could provide valuable opportunity for students 
from underserved communities to take “extraordinary social and economic leaps.”72 Dr. Yun 
shared his own story of how early exposure to coding and computer architecture propelled him 
into his current career, even as a first-generation immigrant from a family that did not have a lot 
of personal resources.73 For this reason, Dr. Yun encouraged embracing and introducing AI to 
students early, because AI has the potential to allow for “unprecedented socio-economic 
movement” for those who embrace it, and “waiting for perfection could leave some students 
behind.”74  
In considering the nuances of these questions, Dr. Dobrin recommended “bifurcating the 
conversation” about AI, separating teaching students how to use AI from discussions of using AI 
for the purposes of teaching and assessing student progress. He argued, “we need to accelerate the 
first, slow down the second.”75 Expanding and accelerating student learning of how to properly 
use AI tools and evaluate their output has the potential to open new pathways that could 
significantly narrow or even close opportunity gaps that students in under-resourced communities 
too often face.76 Restricting the use of AI-based tools for actual teaching and assessing students 
until the effects of such can be properly studied and understood, can protect the most vulnerable 
 
Transcript III, p. 14 line 27 – p. 15 line 18 (Affluent districts will have the budget to contract technologists to mitigate 
challenges and assist in implementation, but poorer districts will not, exacerbating existing inequities). 
68 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 4 lines 30-32. 
69 Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 14 lines 11-17 (schools with more resources will likely have better quality and 
more representative data, and thus better AI tools; underprivileged schools will likely have spotty, bias, and 
unrepresentative data collection, as well as less access and education to use AI tools effectively). 
70 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 15 lines 19-27. See also: Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 9 lines 1-9, in 
remote-learning situations, teachers may also struggle with connectivity and internet access. 
71 Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 14 lines 26-34. 
72 Yun Testimony, Transcript II, p. 5 lines 8-37. 
73 Yun Testimony, Transcript II, p. 5 lines 8-37.  
74 Yun Testimony, Transcript II, p. 2 lines 26-40. See also: Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 4 lines 25-29. Dobrin 
cautioned that students who have less educational exposure to digital technologies in school will be at a 
disadvantage to their peers when they enter the workforce. 
75 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 22 line 37 – p. 23 line 4; p. 29 lines 13-16. 
76 Yun Testimony, Transcript II, p. 4 line 42 – p. 5 line 7; Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 4 lines 25-29. 

 
13 
 
students from experiencing the potential harms and risks of these emerging technologies. 
Regardless of approach, Michelle King, veteran educator and teaching consultant, urged that 
districts slow down, and ensure that education be “a place for everybody to thrive, not just those 
who have the means and the resources.”77  
Finding 2: Development of new AI-based tools for education appears to be motivated by 
industry in search of a market, rather than by educators and school districts in search of 
solutions for current education challenges. Access to this market should be contingent upon 
proper design, efficacy, and attention to children’s civil rights and privacy concerns.  
A primary concern of educators and researchers is that tech-programs and partnerships in schools 
are often driven by cost-efficiency and profit motives, rather than student learning.78 Powerful 
technology companies have both the finances and the media reach to communicate narratives and 
shape policy,79 leading to tremendous pressure for districts to “adopt or be left behind,” even 
though they have historically under-delivered on their promises.80 It is widely understood that 
technology companies should not be left to “regulate themselves,” particularly in the educational 
context.81 Nevertheless, the imbalance of expertise and relevant computing knowledge between 
the public and private sectors challenges the effective oversight and regulation of AI systems in 
schools.82 Dr. Joseph Yun of the Swanson School of Engineering at the University of Pittsburgh 
testified that because the salaries offered by large technology companies eclipse salaries offered 
in the public sector, public regulatory agencies struggle to maintain the expertise needed to 
effectively monitor and address concerns regarding the use of AI from a public-good perspective.83  
Educator and teaching consultant Michelle King testified that even without malice, systems are 
built to benefit those who have the resources and power to create and maintain them.84 She urged 
schools to slow down and understand “for whose benefit, and to whose detriment” these systems 
are being adopted.85 Dr. Roxana Marachi of San Jose State University warned that public-private 
contracts often focus on return on investment for the funders, and are established in ways that 
shield private entities from the public oversight that would generally be expected of solely public 
initiatives.86 Public advisory boards and people in city governance are often investors who stand 
 
77 King Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 10 lines 11-18. 
78 Dias Testimony, Transcript III, p. 9 lines 7-13 (Much of the expedited/rushed roll-out is pushed by the corporations 
and driven by profit); Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 31 lines 1-18 (It is driven by cost efficiency rather than being 
driven by learning). 
79 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 3 lines 30-34. 
80 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 26 line 33 – p. 27 line 11. See also: Dias Testimony, Transcript III, p. 8 lines 29-
36; Yun Testimony, Transcript II, p. 2 lines 26-40. 
81 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 26 lines 27-32; p. 28 lines 13-28 (it is not appropriate to count on the technology 
companies to regulate their own safety, efficacy, and privacy requirements); Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 24 
lines 19-21 (The industry can “absolutely not” be trusted to self-regulate); Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 26 lines 
22-24 (agreement that the industry “cannot govern itself”). 
82 Yun Testimony, Transcript II, p. 23 line 287-p, 24 line 4. 
83 Yun Testimony, Transcript II, p. 23 line 287-p, 24 line 4; p. 34 lines 23-40. 
84 King Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 11 lines 10-14. 
85 King Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 11 lines 22-31. 
86 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 5 line 42 – p. 6 line 4. 

 
14 
 
to directly benefit from these lucrative public-private contracts.87 The organizations that provide 
guidance to school districts for how to execute these contracts are also often captured by industry, 
so contracts are written to favor the interests of the industry rather than the interests of the public.88 
The technology industry has the financial ability and infrastructure to control both product 
development and messaging,89 so promotional materials tend to “gloss over, ignore, or directly 
contradict” the known harms of AI.90 Evaluation research is obscured from public scrutiny inside 
private contracts, even though its results are directly tied to the release of public funds.91 Local 
governments and school boards, eager to solve ongoing challenges in their classrooms, may be 
quick to adopt new, technology-based solutions without first evaluating their efficacy or 
understanding their impact,92 while strained public budgets provide ways for private entities to 
engage in complicated philanthropic efforts that further undermine public oversight and 
governance.93  
Limited liability 
Developers currently face very limited liability when their AI algorithms cause harm. 94 AI 
programs are designed to index large, existing datasets and produce answers from them—similar 
to internet search engines such as Google.95 Because this method of indexing data is largely 
protected under the open internet, its regulation is challenging.96 What’s more, developers often 
cannot explain precisely how their algorithms reach specific recommendations, scores, or 
outcomes.97 This deficiency leaves AI algorithms with no identifiable “bad actor” or “liable actor” 
responsible for problematic outputs.98 These challenges make it difficult to remediate any concerns 
regarding discrimination or disparate impact either up-front through regulation or later through 
 
87 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 31 lines 5-40. 
88 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 35 lines 30-38. 
89 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 3 lines 30-34 (Global Silicon Valley has been pushing the narrative: vertical 
integration is when an entity has both the finances and the media reach to communicate the narratives and shape 
policy). 
90 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 6 lines 5-13. See also: Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 31 lines 1-18 (Adoption 
is based on promises rather than proven results, leading to quick disillusionment and tools that don’t deliver 
expected improvements). 
91 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 32 line 37 – p. 33 line 28; p. 33 lines 36-40. 
92 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 5 lines 21-23 (served on the Digital Privacy Advisory Task Force in San Jose, CA, 
and noticed a “pattern of rushing out [technology] solutions before there was a vetting of whether they worked or 
not.”) 
93 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 31 lines 5-40; see also Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 4 lines 13-18 (these 
programs do not “just end up in classrooms” Philanthropists purchase, grant, and “gift” various tech tools that end 
up in classrooms “faster than legal protections can be enacted to prevent harms”). 
94 Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 30 lines 13-20; (There are no punitive consequences so far associated with 
bad AI). See also: Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 28 lines 6-30 (examples of harm: when a hiring algorithm 
passes up all female candidates; facial recognition software misidentifies people and causes legal trouble; or 
students lose financial aid opportunity or college admission because algorithms flagged or “downgraded” them, 
people are left to manage these challenges on their own because there is no liability).  
95 Yun Testimony, Transcript II, p. 22 line 27 – p. 23 line 8. 
96 Yun Testimony, Transcript II, p. 22 line 27 – p. 23 line 8. 
97 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 20 line 40 – p. 21 line 11. 
98 Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 20 line 35 – p. 21 line 11. 

 
15 
 
discrimination claims reliant on existing civil rights law.99 Even when developers do know exactly 
how algorithms produce their output, this information is often “proprietary” and not shared with 
end-users.100  
Allowing ed-tech partnerships in schools 
It is likely that the workforce of the future will require at least some level of familiarity and 
competence with AI-powered digital technologies.101 As such, experts have urged schools to 
approach new AI-based tools with “healthy skepticism” and not “panic” or “hype.”102 Michelle 
King testified, “we don’t let people just walk into schools, we shouldn’t let new technologies 
either.”103 Luke Bilger, Executive Director of Educational Technology for the School District of 
Philadelphia, testified that his district has restricted the use of generative AI altogether until they 
could “be more intentional and make informed decisions.”104 The district currently only allows the 
use of AI tools that have been “vetted, contracted, and have data privacy agreements in place,” and 
does not currently support the use of AI in instruction, though the goal is to do so in the near 
future.105 
Andrew Buher of Opportunity Labs observed that “one of the most critical levers that school 
districts and schools have is through procurement.”106 School procurement of supportive goods, 
materials, and services total more than $800 billion in a single year.107 Mr. Buher testified that 
leveraging this sum “may be an effective way for K-12 policymakers to shift the incentives. State 
guidance for districts and schools could include AI-specific privacy, data security, and equity 
benchmarks for companies to meet, to be eligible to sell to schools.”108 
Improving public oversight structures 
Despite the imbalance of power and resources, structures can and should be put in place to make 
it easier for schools and districts to navigate appropriately implementing AI-based learning tools 
in their classrooms. Mr. Buher argued that while ultimately regulatory structures are most suitable 
at the federal level, absent meaningful congressional action, states can and should work to develop 
 
99 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 26 lines 19-36; see also p. 20 line 31 – p. 21 line 11 (despite legal protections it is 
difficult to bring legal challenges because of the lack of transparency associated with the technology and the 
inadequate remedies for the scale of algorithmic harm). 
100 King Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 11 lines 22-31. 
101 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 4 lines 25-29. 
102 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 14 lines 9-19 (Fearing AI is a disservice to children, but it must be rigorously 
examined and evaluated in order to harmonize technological advancement with the “healthy holistic development 
of our youth”). 
103 King Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 25 lines 6-26. 
104 Bilger Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 6 lines 27-33. Note: See testimony updates in Mr. Bilger’s written statement, 
Appendix B. 
105 Bilger Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 8 lines 10-24 (The district currently only allows the use of AI tools that have 
been vetted, contracted, and have data privacy agreements in place) Bilger Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 6 line 39 – 
p. 7 line 6 (The district does not currently support the use of AI in instruction, though the goal is to do so in the near 
future). Note: See testimony updates in Mr. Bilger’s written statement, Appendix B. 
106 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 16 lines 3-11. 
107 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 16 lines 3-11. 
108 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 16 lines 3-11. 

 
16 
 
“guardrails” to support their districts and schools.109 He pushed back on the “adopt-or-be-left-
behind” mentality, and urged states to provide superintendents with “cover to make bold 
decisions” about adopting new AI-based programs110 including limiting AI-powered products and 
tools in the classrooms until they can first establish empirical evidence of effectiveness.111  
Dr. Seth Dobrin, IBM’s first ever Global Chief AI Officer and CEO of Qantm AI,112 similarly 
emphasized the need for “a set of principles specifically for education regarding boundaries for AI 
use.” 113 Dr. Dobrin cautioned that not all school boards are equipped to handle proper AI 
implementation,114 and emphasized the need for consistent resources at the state and federal levels 
to ensure that all districts are armed to safely use and control this technology in a reliable 
manner.115 He emphasized that resources must be simple, easy, and consistent for districts to 
use.116 For example, governance documents are easy to standardize, and with proper guidance, not 
difficult to implement.117 Templates to allow schools to easily review procurement procedures, 
trainings, and curriculum would assist schools in making “good decisions with relatively low cost 
for legal reviews.”118  
Other specific strategies that state lawmakers and districts could take include: 
• Establishing benchmarks on safety, privacy, data security, and equity that must be met 
before companies are eligible to sell to schools.119  
• Establishing procurement policies that require products to be designed and tested 
specifically in educational settings, 120 including rigorous evaluation based on 
contemporary data.121 Any claims made about the systems must match the evaluations 
done on them.122  
• Establishing third-party audit providers to assess whether vendors meet standard 
benchmarks, so that schools without the capacity to assess the products have support in 
 
109 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 26 lines 27-32; p. 28 lines 13-28; see also: Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 15 
lines 15-26 (national guidelines and policies must be at the federal level; standardized resources and a basic level of 
universal access to the technology to ensure equitable use and access nationwide).  
110 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 26 line 33 – p. 27 line 11.  
111 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 16 line 35 – p. 17 line 4; p. 25 lines 30-37 (States can provide framework for 
schools to create pilots that rigorously test new AI products and tools). 
112 Dr. Dobrin’s bio is available on his personal website, at: https://drsethdobrin.com/.  
113 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 29 lines 8-12. 
114 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 25 lines 27-38. 
115 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 29 lines 17-22. 
116 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 29 lines 8-22. 
117 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 26 lines 1-17. 
118 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 23 lines 21-30. 
119 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 16 lines 3-24. 
120 Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 20 lines 3-21 (general-purpose technology should “not be tolerated”). 
121 Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 15 lines 3-10 (evaluations should rely on current field data, not just historical 
data records).  
122 Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 15 lines 3-10. 

 
17 
 
doing so.123 Districts could also codify a right to pursue legal action in contracts if a 
company does not continue to meet established benchmarks.124  
• Establishing regional AI purchasing consortiums to negotiate the lowest cost and enforce 
acceptable procurement terms so that smaller districts are not disadvantaged with little 
bargaining power when purchasing from large technology companies.125 
• Creating state-wide repositories of procurement information and vendor performance 
reviews, available to all schools and districts as they vet AI providers and their compliance 
with established benchmarks, to ensure underserved communities are not shouldering more 
risk.126  
Existing civil rights frameworks 
Although the mechanisms for discrimination might be new with AI-based technologies in schools, 
Attorney Kristin Woelfel of the Center for Democracy and Technology argued that discrimination 
itself is not new, and much of it can still be addressed with existing civil rights infrastructure at 
the federal, state and local levels.127 For example:  
• 
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act prohibits discrimination based on race, color, and national 
origin in programs and activities receiving federal financial assistance.128  
• 
Title IX of the Civil Rights Act prohibits discrimination based on sex, gender, and sexual 
orientation in any education program or activity receiving federal financial assistance.129  
• 
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act prohibits discrimination against people with 
disabilities in programs and activities that receive federal financial assistance.130 
• 
Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act prohibits discrimination against qualified 
individuals with disabilities in services, programs, and activities provided by state and local 
governments.131 
• 
The Individuals with Disabilities in Education Act (IDEA) guarantees that children with 
disabilities receive a free and appropriate education that is tailored to their needs in the 
least restrictive environment possible.132  
 
123 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 16 lines 3-24; see also: Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 28 lines 31-41 
(recommendation to create a third-party labeling or certification process in the AI/Education context to show that a 
product has been tested and is reliable before it reaches market). 
124 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 16 lines 3-24; see also: Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 20 lines 3-21 
(need to ensure that companies are not “totally indemnified” from the use of their products). 
125 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 16 lines 24-29. 
126 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 16 lines 30-35. 
127 Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 13 lines 21-26. 
128 42 U.S.C. § 2000d et seq.; Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 16 lines 18-31 (PPT Slide 31, Briefing 03.27.24); See 
also: Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 15 lines 27-35 (Title VI requires students of all races, colors, and national 
origins to have equal access to general education interventions. Title VI needs to now include AI tools that are 
becoming an integral part of the educational experience of students). 
129 20 U.S.C. § 1681 et seq.; Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 16 lines 18-31 (PPT Slide 31, Briefing 03.27.24). 
130 29 U.S.C. §794; Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 16 lines 18-31 (PPT Slide 31, Briefing 03.27.24). 
131 42 U.S.C. §§12131-12134; Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 16 lines 18-31 (PPT Slide 31, Briefing 03.27.24). 
132 20 U.S.C. §1400; Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 16 lines 18-31 (PPT Slide 31, Briefing 03.27.24). 

 
18 
 
Technology companies have powerful financial incentives to develop and scale AI-based 
education programs as quickly as possible. If children’s wellbeing is to remain a priority, panelists 
argued that legislators, public oversight agencies, districts, and schools will have to “shift” these 
incentives to focus on equity and child protection. Andrew Buher testified, “safety, privacy, bias, 
and efficacy will remain issues unless we can shift the incentives for technology companies to 
develop products designed for kids, with a deep understanding of children’s needs.”133 Attorney 
Woelfel distinguished between “positive” and “negative” incentives for developers. 134 She 
described protecting children from potential harms as a “positive” incentive, and avoiding civil 
rights litigation as a “negative” incentive. Ms. Woelfel argued that negative incentives tend to be 
more powerful; while schools and districts wait for new guidance, existing civil rights laws and 
framework can and should be used in the education/AI context. 135 For example, predictive 
analytics that use or implicate protected characteristics in a way that creates a disparate impact can 
be addressed through existing civil rights law.136 
Finding 3: AI-based programs and tools are capable of creating and amplifying bias with far 
greater speed and efficiency than previously existed before these new technologies were 
developed.  
Artificial intelligence is very different from technologies of the past both in its ability to generate 
original content and in its ability to make predictive decisions about new or unknown data.137 
Biases embedded in AI technology have the potential to reinforce patterns of discrimination and 
disparate impact faster, more efficiently, and in a way that is less transparent than previously 
seen.138 Dr. Beatrice Dias, Assistant Professor in Digital Media, Learning, and Leadership from 
the University of Pittsburgh School of Education described AI algorithms as “opinions embedded 
in code.”139 While AI programming may or may not be used in intentionally biased ways, lack of 
diversity on development teams140 coupled with training data and algorithms that neglect or poorly 
represent marginalized groups,141 seems to inescapably reinforce existing biases already prevalent 
 
133 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 15 line 39 – p. 16 line 2. 
134 Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 27 lines 16-30; p. 33 lines 5-16. 
135 Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 27 lines 16-30; p. 33 lines 5-16; see also: Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 22 
lines 15-36 (consider how existing civil rights protections might already apply to AI use in education). 
136 Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 17 line 39 – p. 18 line 6. 
137 Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 6 lines 26-30; Stewart Testimony, Transcript I, p. 8 lines 18-41; p. 9 lines 1-
15; Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 11 line 42 – p. 12 line 10; Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 13 lines 27-32. 
138 Dias Testimony, Transcript III, p. 3 lines 34-42 (discussing the example of the criminal justice system, using AI 
reinforces the same logics of anti-Black racism except it does it much faster, much more efficiently, and in a much 
less transparent way); Boulder Testimony, Transcript III, p. 4 lines 35-39 (AI makes racism and discrimination more 
efficient and less transparent). Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 26 lines 8-19 (the scope and scale of harm with these 
kinds of big data systems is much larger than we have seen before). 
139 Dias Testimony, Transcript III, p. 4 lines 12-21; quoting Cathy O’Neil at: https://youtu.be/_2u_eHHzRto. 
140 Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 19 lines 11-24; Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 24 line 22 – p. 25 line 35; 
Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 4 line 33 – p. 5 line 11; King Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 10 lines 3-10.  
141 Stewart Testimony, Transcript I, p. 29 lines 16-29; Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 3 line 33 – p. 4 line 2; Dobrin 
Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 17 line 41 – p. 18 line 2. 

 
19 
 
throughout society.142 Dr. Dias cautioned that AI-based tools have broad implications for all 
people, regardless of who is represented in the development and training of the programs, and 
regardless of whether or not people consent to be a part of them.143 Some examples of these 
implications and effects include: 
• Early warning systems are significantly more likely to falsely flag Black and Hispanic 
students for being at high risk for not graduating on time.144 These programs integrate 
information regarding academic records, demographic characteristics, and socioeconomic 
background.145 Some programs may even explicitly use race in the algorithms making 
predictions about a student’s risk level.146 When teachers are not given any guidance on 
how to proceed with this information, the likelihood of disparate treatment in the classroom 
further increases.147 These analytics follow students into other longitudinal data sets and 
can also lead to discriminatory policing.148  
• An AI math tutor may gather data that students from low-income school districts perform 
lower in math, and therefore feed those students remedial math content and deprive them 
of the opportunity to learn higher math.149 
• Facial recognition software used in e-proctoring as well as school surveillance programs 
has been shown to misidentify Black and Asian faces 10-100x more than White faces.150 
These errors have prevented students from accessing course materials and taking exams, 
and have resulted in accusations of cheating and flagging students with “suspicion” scores 
that become a permanent part of their student profile.151 E-proctoring programs are also 
more likely to accuse non-native English speakers152 and students with disabilities153 of 
cheating simply because of different speech patterns or body movements. 
• Only 28% of teachers say they have received guidance about how to respond if they suspect 
a student has used generative AI, but 64% report that students have been disciplined for 
 
142 Yun Testimony, Transcript II, p. 2 line 40 – p. 4 line 41; King Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 9 lines 15-23; Dias 
Testimony, Transcript III, p. 3 lines 25-33. 
143 Dias Testimony, Transcript III, p. 3 line 42 – p. 4 line 11. 
144 Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 16 line 28 – p. 17 line 10.  
145 Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 12 lines 11-15. 
146 Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 17 lines 11-19. 
147 Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 16 line 42 – p. 17 line 10 (Teachers handed color-coded lists of students and 
given no guidance on how to proceed, adding to the likelihood of corresponding disparate treatment in the 
classroom because students have been labeled low, moderate, or high risk of not graduating). 
148 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 5 lines 13-26 (PowerSchool is owned by Vista Equity Partners which also co-
owns predictive policing platforms. Predictive policing platform TriTech is no longer used, but they are capturing 
data and we don’t know where the data are going or how they are harming youth). Further discussion of student 
privacy and policing is included the following section of this report.  
149 Stewart Testimony, Transcript I, p. 9 line 33 – p. 10 line 35. 
150 Boulder Testimony, Transcript III, p. 4 lines 22-39; p. 12 lines 28-40. 
151 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 4 lines 17-23; Boulder Testimony, Transcript III, p. 4 lines 22-39; p. 5 lines 1-8; 
p. 12 lines 28-40. Further discussion of privacy and surveillance is included in the following section of this report.  
152 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 5 lines 35-38. 
153 Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 14 lines 4-10; see also: Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 20 lines 11-18 
(Example of turning head to try to hear better, but AI may interpret that as a sign of being dishonest). 

 
20 
 
using or being accused of using the technology. 154 A 2024 Report by the Center for 
Democracy and Technology found that students with disabilities are more likely to be 
disciplined for using generative AI.155 But advocates have argued AI could be classified as 
“use of assistive technology” under Section 504156 and IDEA,157 and disciplining students 
with disabilities more for using AI may violate other rights. 158 Children from under-
resourced school districts may also face higher likelihood of being accused of using 
generative AI.159  
• Social robots used as tutors and therapists for children with intellectual and learning 
disabilities collect sensitive personal information about children with disabilities, and 
could result in increased social isolation, violating FERPA, 160 IDEA, 161 ADA,162 and 
Section 504.163  
• Where AI has been used to replace human assistance for students with disabilities, students 
have complained that technologies such as transcription, live captioning, social-emotional 
robots, speech recognition, and voice recognition are not adequate in quality or accuracy 
to provide the necessary accommodations.164 
 
154 Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p.16 lines 1-17; see: Dwyer, Maddy & Laird, Elizabeth, Up in the Air: Educators 
Juggling the Potential of Generative AI with Detection, Discipline, and Distrust. Center for Democracy and 
Technology. March 2024, at: https://cdt.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/2024-03-21-CDT-Civic-Tech-Generative-
AI-Survey-Research-final.pdf. *Original testimony indicated half of teachers reported that students were disciplined 
for using or being accused of using the technology; this figure was later corrected to 64% as indicated in Dwyer & 
Laird report.  
155 Dwyer, Maddy & Laird, Elizabeth. Report – Up in the air: Educators juggling the potential of generative AI with 
detection, 
discipline, 
and 
distrust. 
Center 
for 
Democracy 
& 
Technology. 
March 
27, 
2024, 
at: 
https://cdt.org/insights/report-up-in-the-air-educators-juggling-the-potential-of-generative-ai-with-detection-
discipline-and-distrust/; See also: Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p.16 lines 1-17 (Special education teachers are 
more likely to report students have been disciplined for the using or being accused of using generative AI); Shah 
Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 14 lines 26-36 (licensed special educators adopt a more restrictive approach for 
generative AI; they are also more likely to be trained to detect AI use, and students with disabilities are more likely 
to be disciplined for using generative AI). 
156 34 CFR § 104.4 
157 Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvements Act, Pub. Law No. 108-446, 118 Stat. 2647 (codified at 20 
U.S.C. §1400, et seq.) 
158 Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 14 lines 37-42; See also: Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 17 lines 26-36 
(example of disciplining a student for using generative AI even if that is an accessibility accommodation for a 
disability, this could violate FAPE); Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p.16 lines 1-17 (students with disabilities stand 
to benefit from AI, for note taking, etc. so we don’t want to see them disciplined at higher rates for using it). 
159 Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p.9 lines 17-31 (story of children from “needy communities” being accused 
of using generative AI because of the perfected language of their essays, reflecting the biases of the educators).  
160 Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act, Pub. Law. No. 93-380, 88 Stat. 574 (codified as 20 U.S.C. §1232g). 
161 Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvements Act, Pub. Law No. 108-446, 118 Stat. 2647 (codified at 20 
U.S.C. §1400, et seq. 
162 42 U.S.C. §§4151 et seq. 
163 Section 504 of The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Pub. Law. No. 93-112 (codified at 29 U.S.C. §794); 34 CFR § 104.4; 
Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 13 line 34 – p. 14 line 3 Further discussion of student privacy and data protection is 
included in the following section of this report.  
164 Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 13 lines 14-25. 

 
21 
 
• Using AI-based tools to diagnose learning disabilities such as autism and dyslexia gives 
inappropriate medical powers to teachers and educators, leading to misdiagnoses and 
inappropriate treatment among other risks.165  
Bias can originate from any stage of the AI lifecycle.166 In the pre-design or development stage, 
developers introduce bias in framing the problems that AI are designed to address.167 During 
design, developers can build and train the AI models using data that contain and reflect historic 
patterns of racial and social inequality and civil rights abuses.168 During deployment, users can 
implement algorithmic systems in a manner that introduces or exacerbates structural, social, and 
economic disadvantage for protected classes.169  
Dr. Yun described bias as an “unfixable, architectural limitation” of AI in its current form.170 He 
explained that because machines do not understand the underlying meaning or concepts of the 
output generated, it is not possible to “take out the bad parts.”171 Dr. Heidari similarly testified that 
there is “no such thing as an unbiased algorithm.” Instead, the goal is to minimize harm, and to 
evaluate the “net harm versus net benefit,” only proceeding if the net benefit exceeds any harm.172 
Dr. Heidari noted that some biases might be addressed by ensuring proper representation of every 
relevant student group in the program training data. 173 But other biases (such as a program 
designed to mimic the previous grading patterns of teachers, when those grading patterns were 
bias), would be much more difficult to correct.174  
 
165 Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 16 lines 7-17. 
166 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 20 lines 3-12. See also: Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 14 lines 17-25 (Bias is 
caused by choices the designers make, the data the AI is trained on, evaluation criteria, and how the AI is promoted 
and used in the classroom). 
167 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 20 lines 3-12. See also: Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 7 lines 1-18 (at the 
development phase, bias can come from the values, norms, and assumptions of the developers themselves). 
168 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 20 lines 3-12. See also: Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 7 lines 1-18 (biases 
in development can transfer into the training data used). 
169 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 20 lines 3-12. See also: Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 7 lines 1-18 
(technology can start with one question but then over time not only unlawfully use data regarding federally 
protected categories, but also use inferential data about people’s demographic attributes); Dobrin Testimony, 
Transcript IV, p. 3 line 33 – p. 4 line 2 (AI training can lead to bias and discrimination based on race, gender, 
socioeconomic status, and other protected characteristics.); Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p.20 lines 12-22 (AI may 
be used to cause intentional discrimination, rooted in explicit histories of scientific racism and eugenics). 
170 Yun Testimony, Transcript II, p. 2 line 40 – p. 4 line 41. 
171 Yun Testimony, Transcript II, p. 23 lines 9-26. 
172 Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 23 line 27 – p. 24 line 11. 
173 Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 28 lines 1-27. See also: Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 14 lines 5-10 (AI only 
works well if it has access to large amounts of representative data that is gathered in a similar educational 
environment on similar students); Stewart Testimony, Transcript I, p. 29 lines 16-29 (need to have a culturally 
responsive focus where the systems can respond to the differences between students. But with large data sets, most 
of the data is coming from white students, which is where the bias is baked in); Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 
3 line 33 – p. 4 line 5 (there is a lot of missing data from more marginalized communities. Traditional methods for 
evaluating IQ, standardized testing, etc. all favor white populations and specifically white males.) 
174 Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 28 lines 1-27. 

 
22 
 
Finding 4: Differing uses for AI-based tools and technologies in schools do not all carry the 
same risks or potential benefits. Regulation and oversight efforts should reflect these 
distinctions.  
As lawmakers, school districts, and educators work to balance embracing new technologies with 
appropriately managing their risks and challenges, experts have recommended separating the 
conversation based on each potential use of these tools. Dr. Dobrin testified, “there’s the teaching 
of how to use AI, and then there’s using AI for the teaching and assessment of students. The latter, 
we need to be very slow and deliberate about. The former, we need to accelerate.”175 Dr. Dobrin 
reasoned that schools must accelerate student learning regarding how to properly use AI tools, 
because “the rest of the world isn’t going to slow that down” and if students do not learn these 
skills, they’re “going to get left behind.”176 In considering “anything other than teaching a human 
how to use AI in an education system,” however, Dr. Dobrin recommended that lawmakers turn 
their focus to assessing and mitigating disparate impact.177 He argued that bias in the models 
themselves is not important; “what is important is the human outcome.”178 
Referring to the European Union’s AI Act,179 Clarance Okoh recommended breaking down this 
latter category of AI use even further. He described three classifications of “risk” to consider: (1) 
those that should be prohibited outright; (2) those that should be subjected to preclearance; and (3) 
those that should be subjected to rigorous evaluation and oversight.180 Mr. Okoh argued that some 
uses of AI are so primed for bias and potential harm, that attempting to implement them in a “less-
bias” way is analogous to attempting to design a “more equitable literacy test” to determine voting 
rights.181 He urged regulators to focus less on bias remediation, and more on determining which 
uses of AI are permissible in the first place: “what domains should we not allow AI to exist in 
should be the first priority.”182  
As discussed in previous sections of this report, subject to rigorous outcomes evaluation, some AI 
tools may prove useful in assisting educators with tasks such as personalizing lesson plans and 
evaluating student work.183 Among the most controversial and potentially harmful uses, however, 
are AI based technologies designed to perform student surveillance, content filtering, and 
censorship.184 Using AI specifically for these tasks has involved approval and collaboration with 
agencies not typically involved in education, such as state, local, and federal law enforcement 
 
175 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 22 line 37 – p. 23 line 4; p. 29 lines 13-16. 
176 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 22 line 37 – p. 23 line 4; p. 29 lines 13-16. 
177 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 23 lines 5-20. 
178 Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 23 lines 5-20. 
179 The EU Artificial Intelligence Act, up-to-date analysis available at: https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/  
180 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 29 line 31 – p. 30 line 19; p. 32 lines 29-33. 
181 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 29 lines 23-33. 
182 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 29 line 31 – p. 30 line 19; p. 32 lines 29-33. See also: Dias Testimony, Transcript 
III, p. 12 lines 18-27 (encourage grappling with the questions and determining how and which parts of AI we want to 
use and which parts we don’t and to reconcile the associated costs and tradeoffs). 
183 See Finding 1.  
184 Stewart Testimony, Transcript I, p. 24 lines 13-19. (considering harm v. benefit, we need to be selective: it is never 
appropriate to use AI for predictive policing in schools, but perhaps it is reasonable for teachers to use AI to assist in 
lesson planning and grading).  

 
23 
 
agencies and the Department of Homeland Security.185 Data derived from these programs is often 
monitored by military and ex-military personnel with little or no experience with children, adding 
a potentially alarming layer of complexity that must be considered when developing appropriate 
regulations.186  
Student surveillance  
AI algorithms depend on large datasets to generate content and make predictions. The ongoing 
growth and expansion of these datasets raises concern regarding privacy, particularly when this 
data involves children.187 AI programs have the capacity to collect children’s social-emotional 
learning metrics, behavior metrics, biometric data, and other sensitive information, and to use this 
data for surveillance and predictive analytics that disproportionately impact vulnerable 
communities.188 Fourteen states are now implementing cradle-to-career digital data initiatives, 
with “lifelong” educational records being stored in digital wallets known as “stackable digital 
credentials” that cannot be deleted.189 While students may own access to their own data, companies 
that sponsor the AI software also own this data.190 Dr. Roxana Marachi, Associate Professor of 
Teacher Education at San Jose State University, noted that even when data is aggregated, 
individuals can easily be re-identified with as few as 3-4 datapoints.191 Because edtech companies 
can be deemed a “school official” in relevant contracts, children’s data may not be protected under 
FERPA,192 allowing for extraction of vast amounts of data with “no real oversight.”193 Most edtech 
 
185 Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 15 line 21 – p. 16 line 7; p. 26 line 33 – p. 27 line 8. 
186 Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 15 line 21 – p. 16 line 7; p. 26 line 33 – p. 27 line 8. 
187 Bilger Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 6 lines 9-26 (AI is at its base about data, so it is important that any tool has 
been vetted and includes a contract in place about data privacy and education in place for teachers about what 
should and should not be allowed to be used or collected in those programming); see also: Dobrin Testimony, 
Transcript IV, p. 4 lines 5-11 (citing privacy concerns regarding data, also noted that the way data is collected and 
used may violate some state and federal regulations); Dion Lassiter Testimony, Transcript III, p. 20 lines 10-41 (if 
used the wrong hands this data could be targeted for malicious intent such as recruiting for hate groups, targeting 
victims of hate crimes, sex trafficking, and other dangerous activity targeting children). 
188 Marachi Testimony, Transcript III, p. 4 lines 23-30; p. 31 line 25-p. 32 line 2. See also: Okoh Testimony, Transcript 
I, p.19 line 37 – p. 20 line 2 (surveillance technologies are disproportionately deployed against youth of color, queer 
and trans youth, and youth with disabilities); Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p.17 line 40 – p. 18 line 3 (Teachers at 
Title I schools and special education teachers report higher prevalence of these technologies); Shah Testimony, 
Transcript IV, p. 13 line 34 – p. 14 line 3 (“social robots” used to support children with intellectual and learning 
disabilities collect personal information about children they interact with. This could violate FERPA, IDEA, ADA, 
Section 504); Shah Testimony, Transcript IV p. 15 lines 21-34 (surveillance and monitoring equipment designed to 
monitor students and reduce violence at school disproportionately targets students with disabilities for “non-
normative” behaviors and movements and nudges them toward law enforcement agencies); Shah Testimony, 
Transcript IV, p. 15 line 35 – p. 16 line 7 (cameras in schools similarly flag students with disabilities as “suspicious” 
and send them to law enforcement because of societal biases against people with disabilities). 
189 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 6 line 21 – p. 7 line 16. 
190 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 7 lines 7-16. 
191 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 25 lines 1-38. 
192 20 U.S.C. § 1232g; see also 34 CFR Part 99. 
193 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 4 lines 31-41. 

 
24 
 
companies pledge not to share or sell student data, but those companies are bought and sold 
regularly, and the data is sold with those transfers.194 
Dr. Marachi warned that “more data” does not necessarily imply “better” data or produce less-
biased results.195 Data sharing across systems (such as healthcare, academic, behavioral, policing, 
and even genomics) does, however, create dangerous new opportunities for surveillance and social 
control.196 A 2023 study conducted by the Center for Democracy and Technology197 found that: 
• 
38% of teachers reported their schools share sensitive data with law enforcement;  
• 
36% reported that their schools use predictive analytics to identify children who might 
commit future criminal behavior;  
• 
36% reported that their schools track students’ physical locations through their phones and 
other digital devices;  
• 
37% reported that their schools monitor the students’ personal social media accounts;  
• 
33% reported that their schools use facial recognition to regulate access to schools.198 
Despite federal protections barring the unauthorized disclosure of student records to third parties, 
including law enforcement, these technologies have greatly increased police activity and presence 
in schools in Pennsylvania and other states. 199 When surveillance programs and predictive 
algorithms flag students as “at risk,” these flags become a permanent part of student records.200 
 
194 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 3 lines 23-26. 
195 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 25 lines 1-38. 
196 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 25 lines 1-38; see also: Okoh, Clarence. Dangerous Data: What communities 
should know about artificial intelligence, the school-to-prison-pipeline, and school surveillance. The Center for Law 
and Policy. May 2024, at: https://www.clasp.org/publications/report/brief/ai-data-justice-school-prison-pipeline/  
197
 https://cdt.org/press/new-survey-students-and-teachers-say-tech-use-in-schools-is-still-threatening-privacy-
civil-rights/  
198 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 17 line 32 – p. 18 line 3. See also: Larid, Elizabeth; Dwyer, Madeliene; Grant-
Chapman, Hugh. Off Task: EdTech Threats to Student Privacy and Equity in the Age of AI. Center for Democracy and 
Technology (2023), at: https://cdt.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/091923-CDT-Off-Task-web.pdf.  
199 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 17 line 15 - p. 18 line 15 (schools routinely procure controversial surveillance 
technologies from private third-party vendors without adequately scrutinizing these systems—this surveillance 
dramatically expands the presence of law enforcement into the lives of marginalized student populations and their 
families); Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p.19 lines 18-36 (despite federal data protections, school surveillance 
technologies grant law enforcement extensive access to very sensitive data); Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 18 
lines 15-33 (The Pasco County School District in Florida shared confidential student records with law enforcement, 
which used the system to develop a secret predictive policing system to surveil students who were, “destined for a 
life of crime.” 18,000 students were in the database, and school-based police officers were instructed to surveil 
these children and develop actionable criminal intelligence on them. Local school-based officers in Boston shared 
135 incident reports with Boston Regional Intelligence Center resulting in the detention and deportation of at least 
one student due to data sharing with local law enforcement); Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 15 lines 5-29 (88% 
of teachers say their schools monitor students online and 38% of teachers whose school uses this monitoring say 
that a student was contacted by law enforcement. This is higher for Title I teachers and licensed special education 
teachers; 46% special education teachers, and 42% Title I teachers); Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 9 line 32-
p. 10 line 10 (using AI for student surveillance and discipline could lead to unnecessary law enforcement action and 
increased discipline).  
200 Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 28 line 28 – p. 29 line 14.  

 
25 
 
Even if later shown to be issued in error, there is no way to “unflag” this data.201 Attorney Clarance 
Okoh, Senior Policy Council at the Center for Law and Social Policy, testified that in addition to 
implicating a range of federal anti-discrimination and privacy protections; 202 young people’s 
exposure to law enforcement surveillance in school leads to heightened emotional distress, trauma, 
and PTSD; raises student fear for their safety; and evokes perceptions that they themselves are 
potential perpetrators who deserve to be surveilled.203 Students report the presence of surveillance 
technologies makes them less likely to seek help at school when experiencing mental wellness 
challenges, ultimately making schools less safe for everyone. 204 Schools’ investment in 
surveillance technologies at the expense of other academic supports can further compound these 
issues, increasing the school to prison pipeline.205 A 2022 study in the Journal of Criminal Justice 
found students attending high surveillance schools have lower test scores, are less likely to attend 
college, and are more likely to face exclusionary discipline, with a disproportionate impact on 
Black students.206  
Content filtering and censorship 
AI-based technologies have been used to filter content on student devices in ways that some worry 
may amount to a “digital book ban.”207 Students and teachers have reported that content associated 
with LGBTQ+ students and students of color is more likely to be filtered and/or blocked than other 
similar content (for example, allowing access to taylorswift.com but not bet.com).208 Attorney 
Okoh testified that AI-based content filtering technology may be particularly concerning as 
lawmakers in some jurisdictions have pursued efforts to “silence, erase, and censor black history 
and LGBT identities in schools.”209 He cautioned that student device monitoring and social media 
surveillance expands schools’ capacity to enforce state censorship laws by limiting students’ 
access to digital content that affirms their identities, and provides schools the ability to punish 
 
201 Ibid; (Some fusion centers are scraping children’s social media accounts looking for violent language trying to 
predict who will be the next school shooter, etc. but without understanding youth culture these signs can be 
misunderstood. Once a student is flagged there is no way to “unflag” them. Allowing for erroneous data to be 
removed or edited would help with harm reduction.) 
202 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 20 lines 23-31; The use of AI for school safety and student discipline implicate 
Title VI and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act; Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act; The Americans with Disabilities Act; 
The Individuals with Disabilities in Education Act; Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972; Family Education 
Rights and Privacy Act; Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act; and Amendments I, IV, and XIV of the U.S. 
Constitution. 
203 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 19 lines 4-14. See also: National Association of School Psychologists Research on 
School Security: The Impact of Security Measures on Students (2013), at: https://audioenhancement.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/school-security-by-NASP.pdf.  
204 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p.19 lines 18-36. 
205 Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 9 line 32-p. 10 line 10. 
206 Johnson, Odis Jr; Jabbari, Jason. Infrastructure of social control: A multi-level counterfactual analysis of 
surveillance and Black education. Journal of Criminal Justice. Vol 83. November-December 2022, 101983, at: 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0047235222001039?dgcid=author; 
see 
also: 
Okoh 
Testimony, Transcript I, p.19 lines 16 – 18; p. 22 lines 22-34. 
207 Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 14 lines 20-39. 
208 Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 14 lines 20-39. 
209 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 18 lines 36-42. 

 
26 
 
students for accessing that content.210 In addition to increasing student discipline and potential 
contact with law enforcement, Chad Dion-Lassiter, Executive Director of the Pennsylvania Human 
Relations Commission warned these tools may also create further educational disconnect and 
disengagement for Black, Brown, AAPI, LGBTQ+ students and others who feel that the 
curriculum does not reflect them.211 
Finding 5: The long-term success, equity, and effectiveness of new AI-based tools in 
education depend on measured implementation that proactively seeks to prevent harms 
before they occur, as well as active participation and support from educators, parents, 
students, researchers, and other relevant stakeholders. 
Speakers throughout this study emphasized that the development of AI-based tools and 
technologies in education must be proactively regulated and understood prior to their 
implementation in schools.212 Attorney Clarence Okoh of the Center for Law and Social Policy 
testified, “The idea that every technology should enter into the classroom or that every technology 
should enter into society and we should just think about remediation in a post-hoc fashion, just to 
me doesn’t feel like a viable path forward just given the scale of harms that we’re seeing in our 
communities.”213 
AI-assisted technologies, and the data they gather, have the potential to create identifiable 
permanent records that follow children for a lifetime. 214 Despite their potential benefits, the 
potential for unintended yet irreparable, life-long harm has led many experts to urge districts to 
limit or even stop implementation entirely until these tools can be properly understood, and 
appropriate guidance and transparency plans can be put into place.215 Where new technologies are 
 
210 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 18 lines 1-4.  
211 Dion Lassiter Testimony, Transcript III, p. 19 lines 3-26. 
212 Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 22 lines 33-36 (urged inclusion, attention to the civil rights impact, and caution 
in auditing before bringing new AI-based technologies into schools); Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 20 lines 
22-29 (urged proactively ensuring that whatever technology is developed is aligned with current civil rights 
protections, and that teachers are educated on this along with people deploying the technologies at the district and 
school levels); Bilger Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 6 line 27 – p. 7 line 6 (the School District of Philadelphia has 
restricted generative AI in the district entirely until they are able to make intentional, informed decisions. The district 
does not currently support the use of AI in instruction, but its goal is to do so in the near future). 
213 Okoh Testimony, Transcript I, p. 30 lines 7-10. 
214 Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 6 lines 31-37 (we are dealing with technology that has amassed a huge 
amount of data, and can make predictive decisions, and curate publicly available content about each of us 
individually and create composites of what that behavior should determine); Marachi Testimony, Transcript I, p. 6 
line 21 – p. 7 line 16 (regarding “lifelong” educational records being stored in digital wallets known as “stackable 
digital credentials” that cannot be deleted). 
215 Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 22 lines 24-36 (think about slowing down, reducing the hype; do we even need 
these technologies right now in education?) Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 16 line 35 – p. 17 line 4; p. 25 lines 
30-37 (recommended strategically limiting AI-powered products and tools in classrooms until they establish 
empirical evidence for effectiveness); p. 25 lines 30-37 (States should consider prohibiting the use of AI tools entirely 
in K-3 classrooms); King Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 25 lines 6-26 (“Just because you can create it doesn’t mean you 
should create it”). 

 
27 
 
necessary, deployment must include proactive, measured consideration of the impact on all 
populations, especially the most marginalized children.216  
Mr. Buher of Opportunity Labs testified that technology companies are unlikely to make serious 
moves toward self-regulation on their own accord, and many individual school districts do not 
have the resources or capacity to assume this responsibility by themselves.217 Therefore, effective 
implementation will require input and collaboration from all stakeholders—not just lawmakers 
and regulators; but also administrators, teachers, parents, students, and community groups. These 
stakeholders must hold a significant, meaningful role in guiding emerging technologies from the 
very beginning, including design, development, and procurement, not just during 
implementation.218  
Teachers, parents, and students 
If AI-based educational tools and technologies are to be designed with children’s needs as a focal 
point, teachers, parents, and students must be participatory actors from the very beginning of 
product development. 219 Students with disabilities, those from marginalized socioeconomic 
backgrounds, and racial and ethnic minorities must be represented at the table.220 Without input 
from these stakeholders, attorney and disability rights activist Maitreya Shah of the Berkman Klein 
Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University described development as a “playground” for 
those who may simply wish to experiment without fully appreciating the potential impact of the 
systems they build. Mr. Shah illustrated with the example of a developer who might “wake up one 
day and decide” to make a tool that tracks eyeball movements of a child with autism to diagnose 
or detect the disorder, even if they “have no idea about what autism is or are not autistic 
themselves.”221 
Once programs are deployed, parents, students, and teachers must be well informed of where they 
are being used and their limitations so that they can help identify flaws or gaps and make informed 
decisions about their use. 222 Mr. Buher noted that parents have historically played a role in 
 
216 Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 22 lines 24-36 (if new technology is necessary, consider impact on all populations 
as well as marginalized groups and focus on auditing processes in deployment.) 
217 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 28 lines 13-38. See also: Dobrin Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 24 lines 19-21 (The 
industry can “absolutely not” be trusted to self-regulate); Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 26 lines 22-24 (Agree 
that the industry cannot govern itself) 
218 King Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 10 lines 3-10 (one of the challenges is that in the current system not everyone is 
at the table); Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 13 lines 25-28 (these technologies should not be integrated without 
first asking people with disabilities what they think of them, involving them in the design and deployment, etc.) 
Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 15 line 39 – p. 16 line 2 (AI is not designed by expert educators from diverse 
backgrounds or using data that is representative of the students that will access it). Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript 
II, p. 19 line 35 – p. 20 line 2 (Need to ensure the people at the table designing and procuring EdTech products are 
representative of the educational community. There are often no educators as part of the teams doing the design). 
219 Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 19 lines 30-35. 
220 Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 15 lines 15-26. 
221 Shah Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 19 lines 11-24. 
222 Dion Lassiter Testimony, Transcript III, p. 19 lines 27-35 (students and parents should know if AI is being used in 
programs, curriculum or grading systems so that they can help identify flaws or gaps in the program and make 
informed decisions about their education); Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 15 lines 11-14 (teachers need to be 
aware about the limitations and capabilities before the tools are implemented in the classroom so that they can 

 
28 
 
technology adoption, and there is already a legal framework requiring parents to sign off on the 
use of student data and student data sharing—but there is a “massive gap” in understanding the 
risks and benefits associated with AI. 223 This leaves an opportunity for state departments of 
education, districts, and schools, to build “substantial feedback loops” that allow parents to be 
knowledgeable advisors about these technologies for their children and to advocate for them.224 
Teachers must similarly be aware of the limitations and capabilities of new technologies before 
the tools are implemented so that they can watch for potential issues, inaccuracies, and biased 
information, and monitor the impact on students.225 Mr. Buher challenged districts and lawmakers 
who “believe in the promise of AI” to “invest in professional training and development, ensuring 
that all educators have the time to reflect, experiment, and refine their practice with AI-powered 
products and tools.”226 
Interdepartmental district collaboration 
Attorney Kristin Woelfel of the Center for Democracy and Technology emphasized the need for 
multidisciplinary and interdepartmental committees to provide guidance and audit technology use 
in schools; for example, ensuring collaboration between data officers and district civil rights 
officers.227 At the very least, Ms. Woelfel urged that procurement be completed by people with 
the experience and expertise to ask appropriate questions and set expectations with vendors.228  
In Philadelphia, Luke Bilger, Executive Director of Education Technology for the School District 
of Philadelphia, testified that the district established an AI oversight committee focused on creating 
relationships and collaborating with other districts to learn about AI before establishing district-
wide guidance.229 The committee includes instruction teams, the special education office, the 
office of general counsel, the students’ rights and supports office, the IT security team, and the 
 
watch for potential issues, inaccuracies, and biased information, and monitor the impact on students); Shah 
Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 22 lines 15-18 (everyone must have a seat at the table when developing AI regulations; 
people can participate when regulations are being considered). 
223 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 28 lines 13-38 (reference to FERPA and COPPA, Family Educational Rights and 
Privacy Act and the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Rule). 
224 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 28 lines 13-38. See also: Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 30 line 21 – p. 
31 line 8. (schools must build a “feedback loop” for families to report to if they are concerned that technology has 
been used improperly with their child). 
225 Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 15 lines 11-14. 
226 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 17 lines 10-18. 
227 Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 18 lines 7-17 (recommended establishing AI guidance Committee or AI policy 
Committee to audit and update school’s non-discrimination policies to address data and technology use; designate 
specific personnel to ensure compliance with nondiscrimination law; bridge connections between data and civil 
rights officers in schools and states; and conduct analysis and publicly report information on nondiscrimination 
policies.) See also, Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 21 lines 19-36 (emphasized procurement must be managed 
by people with the expertise and knowledge to evaluate whether purchasing can meet the school’s needs and 
comply with the school’s policies on privacy and antidiscrimination). 
228 Woelfel Testimony, Transcript II, p. 21 lines 19-36 (Some schools have procurement done by someone in the 
finance office. This needs to be people who can ask questions, show them your antidiscrimination policy and have 
an honest conversation about whether purchasing can meet the school’s needs and comply with the policies). 
229 Bilger Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 6 lines 33-38. Note: See testimony updates in Mr. Bilger’s written statement, 
Appendix B. 

 
29 
 
district communications office.230 The committee has met with teachers, parents, and students to 
ask them how they feel about AI and how they are currently using it.231 They have also worked to 
provide an introduction and definitions of AI and its risks and benefits to staff, families, and 
students; create guidance for students, educators, and staff; develop an AI use continuum so 
teachers can determine the level of AI integration they want in their assignments; and to create 
guidance and frequently asked questions for students’ use.232 The committee is also developing 
professional learning opportunities so that teachers and staff can be properly trained to use AI in 
the correct way and avoid risks.233  
Purpose-driven implementation 
As schools and districts grapple with new technologies that are unfolding far faster than previously 
experienced,234 evidence regarding the efficacy and safety of implementing them at scale has not 
kept pace. 235 Governance and oversight efforts must delineate responsibilities of AI creators, 
educators, students, and their guardians.236 Dr. Beatrice Dias urged that solutions be multiple and 
community driven. She testified, “it’s not like this one large regulatory action is going to solve all 
our problems.”237 Dr. Dias encouraged people and communities to create their own narrative for 
what they want education to look like, and then allow technologists to respond to that vision, rather 
than the other way around.238 She provided the example of a community in Barcelona, Spain, that 
is focusing on community initiatives to determine people’s vision for education, and then using 
that vision to guide local policy regarding how technology is used in that space.239  
In developing guidelines, Andrew Buher encouraged states to incentivize districts to invest in 
curriculum that centers the human relationship, even as they explore new technologies.240 Dr. 
Nicol Tuner-Lee of the Brookings Institution urged schools to create guidance that centers equity 
and “works backwards” from high-risk scenarios to ensure protection of children’s privacy and 
 
230 Bilger Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 6 line 39 – p. 7 line 6. Note: See testimony updates in Mr. Bilger’s written 
statement, Appendix B. 
231 Bilger Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 7 lines 6-20. Note: See testimony updates in Mr. Bilger’s written statement, 
Appendix B. 
232 Bilger Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 7 line 38 – p. 8 line 7. Note: See testimony updates in Mr. Bilger’s written 
statement, Appendix B. 
233 Bilger Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 8 lines 7-10; 18-24. Note: See testimony updates in Mr. Bilger’s written 
statement, Appendix B. 
234 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 28, lines 33-35 (This technology is different, its’ trickier. Its’ moving faster. 
Schools weren’t as prepared as they have been at other inflection points when technology has been adopted). 
235 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 17 lines 10-20 (there is not yet enough evidence of effectiveness for districts 
to pay for AI-powered products and tools at scale, particularly at the expense of personnel or high-quality 
instructional materials, mental and social health, social emotional health services, high dose tutoring, and out of 
school time programing with demonstrated evidence of impact).  
236 Heidari Testimony, Transcript I, p. 15 line 36 – p.16 line 5. 
237 Dias Testimony, Transcript III, p. 12 lines 2-17. 
238 Dias Testimony, Transcript III, p. 10 lines 31-36. 
239 Dias Testimony, Transcript III, p. 11 lines 34-40 (optimizing people’s ideas instead of optimizing for efficiency); 
Refence to Ruja Benjamin at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QO3nY_u6hos.  
240 Buher Testimony, Transcript III, p. 25 line 38 – p. 26 line 4. 

 
30 
 
civil rights.241 Educator and teaching consultant Michelle King cautioned that before any strategic 
initiative can take place, schools must have “a vision of what it looks like if we’re winning or 
doing well.”242 She cautioned, “if we fall into the trap of speediness, we might create the conditions 
for worse problems.”243 Ms. King described education not as a “separate entity from society,” but 
as the very foundation of society itself.244 More important than student “success,” she argued, is 
producing people who can live with each other, heal from collective trauma, and build 
community.245  
Recommendations 
Among their duties, advisory committees of the Commission are authorized to advise the Agency 
(1) concerning matters related to discrimination or a denial of equal protection of the laws under 
the Constitution and the effect of the laws and policies of the Federal Government with respect to 
equal protection of the laws, and (2) upon matters of mutual concern in the preparation of reports 
of the Commission to the President and the Congress.246 In keeping with these responsibilities, 
and given the testimony heard on this topic, the Committee submits the following 
recommendations to the Commission:  
1. The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights should: 
a. Call on government and industry to regulate and manage the development of AI tools 
and products so that developers are accountable for measurement of their efficacy and 
discriminatory consequences.  
b. Issue a statement acknowledging the potential long-term impact of these technologies 
on children, providing a basis for conducting a national study regarding the use of AI-
based tools and programs in K-12 education and the related civil rights impact with the 
aim of identifying and minimizing the adverse implications for students’ civil rights.  
2. The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights should issue the following recommendations to 
Pennsylvania Governor Josh Shapiro: 
a. Create a state-level task force, with representation from the Attorney General of 
Pennsylvania; the Commonwealth Departments of Education and Human Services; and 
the Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission; school administrators; teachers; and 
parents, to support school districts in the development, implementation, and monitoring 
of procurement standards with AI-specific privacy, data security, and equity 
benchmarks, and to take other steps to empower school districts to safely use and 
control AI tools.  
 
241 Turner Lee Testimony, Transcript II, p. 11 line 41 – p. 12 line 9. 
242 King Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 28 lines 15-25. 
243 King Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 28 lines 15-25. 
244 King Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 9 lines 27-36. 
245 King Testimony, Transcript IV, p. 11 line 32 – p. 12 line 8. 
246 45 C.F.R. § 703.2. 

 
31 
 
b. Advocate to appropriate agencies that the Commonwealth’s settlement of any case 
resolving civil rights violations involving the use of AI in K-12 education should 
include a public relief provision allowing school districts to offset the cost of 
implementing AI services and security measures.  
3. The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights should issue the following recommendations to the 
Pennsylvania Department of Education: 
a. Encourage local school boards to create advisory committees to increase public 
awareness and knowledge of the impacts, uses, and potential harms of AI tools on K-
12 students, including ensuring the participation of students with disabilities, racial and 
ethnic minorities, English language learners, and students of low socio-economic 
status. 
b. Establish benchmarks on safety, privacy, data security, and equity which must be met 
before technology companies are eligible to sell to schools. 
c. Create a program through which developers of AI curricula and tools for K-12 
education can certify that they have incorporated best practices in their design, 
development, and deployment. Certification should be a prerequisite to receiving 
government funds. 
d. Create a state-wide repository of procurement information and vendor performance 
reviews, available to all schools and districts as they vet AI providers and their 
compliance with established benchmarks, to ensure under-resourced communities are 
not shouldering disproportionately more risk. 
e. Establish procurement policies that require products to be designed and tested 
specifically in educational settings, including rigorous evaluation based on 
contemporary data. Require that any claims made about the systems match the 
evaluations done on them.  
f. Establish regional AI purchasing consortia to negotiate the lowest cost and enforce 
acceptable procurement terms, so that smaller districts are not disadvantaged by their 
lesser bargaining power. 
g. Establish auditing standards to assess whether vendors meet standard benchmarks, so 
that schools without the capacity to assess the products have support in doing so.  
h. Provide districts with template procurement contracts that include effective remedies 
for breach of contract. 
4. The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights should issue the following recommendation to the U.S. 
Senate and House of Representatives:  
a. The U.S. Congress should direct its committees having oversite for finance, education, 
commerce and justice to identify and explore tax and other incentives for private 
industry to conduct research into processes and mechanisms to address privacy and 

 
32 
 
civil rights concerns in the development of AI tools and products, and to take other 
steps aimed at to mitigating the potential adverse impact on children’s civil rights. 
5. The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights should issue the following recommendations to the U.S. 
Department of Education: 
a. Encourage states to enable local school boards to create advisory committees to 
increase public knowledge and awareness of the impacts, uses, and potential harms of 
AI tools on K-12 students, including ensuring the participation of students with 
disabilities, racial and ethnic minorities, English language learners, and students of low 
socio-economic status. 
b. Issue guidance to recipients of federal education funding regarding the applicability of 
existing civil rights legislation to the use of AI in K-12 educational settings, including 
recommended steps for recipients to take when procuring, using, evaluating, and 
monitoring AI-related tools to avoid violations of those laws. 
c. Establish benchmarks on safety, privacy, data security, and equity that must be met 
before technology companies are eligible to sell to schools. 
d. Create a federal repository of state procurement information and vendor performance 
reviews, available to all schools and districts as they vet AI providers and their 
compliance with established benchmarks, to ensure under-resourced communities are 
not shouldering disproportionately more risk. 
e. Establish procurement policies that require products to be designed and tested 
specifically in educational settings, including rigorous evaluation based on 
contemporary data. Require that any claims made about the systems match the 
evaluations done on them.  
f. Develop models and incentivize the establishment of regional AI purchasing consortia 
to negotiate the lowest cost and enforce acceptable procurement terms so that smaller 
districts are not disadvantaged by their lesser bargaining power. 
g. Establish standards for third-party audit providers to assess whether vendors meet 
standard benchmarks, so that schools without the capacity to assess the products have 
support in doing so.  
h. Provide template contracts that include a right to pursue legal action if a company does 
not continue to meet established benchmarks. 
i. Close the FERPA loophole allowing ed-tech companies to be deemed “school officials” 
who have enhanced access to student records which could lead to usage that could 
propagate disparate outcomes 
j. Require that recipients of grants issued to states plan and demonstrate their capacity to 
mitigate potential AI risks and harms K-12 students as part of the award application 
process. 

 
33 
 
6. The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights should issue the following recommendation to U.S. 
Department of Justice: 
a. Direct the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention to collect data 
regarding the use of AI surveillance, reporting, investigations, prosecution, sentencing, 
detainment, and incarceration of K-12 students, and the disclosure of such usage to 
students affected thereby.  
 
 
 
 

 
34 
 
Appendix 
A. Briefing materials247 
a. Transcript  
b. Agenda 
c. Minutes  
d. Panelist Presentations (PPT) 
e. Other records 
B. Written Testimony248 
a. Luke Bilger, School District of Philadelphia  
b. Khalid Mumin, Pennsylvania Secretary of Education  
c. Kristin Woelfel, Center for Democracy & Technology 
 
247 Briefing materials available at: https://usccr.box.com/s/8khpwuytdrttohpmmy42in72zih5pkw8. 
248 Written testimony available at: https://usccr.box.com/s/bx2azcjyynogzfkexcc76ugxnirz9cst. 

 
 
 
Pennsylvania Advisory Committee to the  
United States Commission on Civil Rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U. S. Commission on Civil Rights Contact 
USCCR Contact 
Regional Programs Unit 
 
 
 
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights 
 
 
 
230 S. Dearborn, Suite 2120 
 
 
 
Chicago IL, 60604 
 
 
 
(312) 353-8311 
 
This report is the work of the Pennsylvania Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. The report, 
which may rely on studies and data generated by third parties, is not subject to an independent review by Commission 
staff. Advisory Committee reports to the Commission are wholly independent and reviewed by Commission staff only 
for legal and procedural compliance with Commission policies and procedures. Advisory Committee reports are not 
subject to Commission approval, fact-checking, or policy changes. The views expressed in this report and the findings 
and recommendations contained herein are those of a majority of the Advisory Committee members and do not 
necessarily represent the views of the Commission or its individual members, nor do they represent the policies of the 
U.S. Government.  
